Each year the emperor penguin lays one egg, the pigeon lays one or two eggs, the gull typically lays three eggs, the Canada goose four to six eggs, and the American merganser ten or eleven eggs. What determines clutch size in birds? The ultimate factors that determine clutch size are the requirements for long-term (evolutionary)survival. Clutch size is viewed as an adaptation under the control of natural selection.
Natural selection will favor those birds that leave the most descendants to future generations. At first thought we might hypothesize that natural selection favors a clutch size that is the physiological maximum the bird can lay. We can test this hypothesis by taking eggs from nests as they are laid. When we do this, we find that some birds, such as the common pigeon, are determinate layers; they lay a given number of eggs, no matter what. The pigeon lays two eggs, if you take away the first, it will incubate the second egg only. If you add a third egg, it will incubate all three. But many other birds are indeterminate layers; they will continue to lay eggs until the nest is "full". If eggs are removed once they are laid, these birds will continue laying. When this subterfuge was used on a mallard female, she continued to lay one egg per day until she had laid 100 of them. Evidence from other, similar experiments suggests that most birds under normal circumstances do not lay their physiological limit of eggs but that ovulation is stopped long before this limit is reached.
The British ornithologist David Lack was one of the first ecologists to recognize the importance of evolutionary thinking in understanding adaptations in life history traits.  In 1947 Lack put forward the idea that clutch size in birds was determined by the number of young that parents can provide with food.  If his hypothesis is correct, the total production of young ought to be highest at the normal clutch size.  And if one experimentally increased clutch size by adding eggs to nests, increased clutches should suffer greater losses because the parents could not feed the extra young in the nest. 
One way to think about this problem of optimum clutch size is to use a simple economic approach. Everything an organism does has some costs and some benefits. The benefits of laying more eggs are very clear--more descendants in the next generation. The costs are less clear. There is an energy cost to make each additional egg, and there is a further cost to feed each additional nestling. If the adult birds must work harder to feed their young, there is also a potential cost in adult survival -the adults may not live until the next breeding season. If adults are unable to work harder, there is a risk of reduction in offspring quality. Models of this type are useful because they help us think about the costs and benefits for a particular ecological strategy. No organism has an infinite amount of energy to spend on its activities. The reproductive rate of birds can be viewed as one sector of a bird's energy balance, and the needs of reproduction must be maximized within the constraints of other energy requirements. The total requirements involve metabolic maintenance, growth, energy used for predator avoidance, competitive interactions, and reproduction. According to Lack's hypothesis, if enough additional eggs are placed in a bird's nest, reproductive energy requirements escalate and the whole brood will suffer from starvation so that, in fact, fewer young birds will fledge from nests containing large numbers ofeggs.
In England, the blue tit normally lays a clutch of nine to eleven eggs.  What would happen if blue tits had a brood of twelve or thirteen?  A researcher artificially manipulated broods at hatching by adding or subtracting chicks and found that the survival of the young blue tits in manipulated broods was poor. Blue tits feed on insects and apparently cannot feed additional young adequately, so more of the young starve. Consequently, it would not benefit a blue tit in the evolutionary sense to lay more eggs and the results are consistent with Lack's hypothesis. Individual birds appear to produce the clutch size that maximizes their reproductive potential.
 
The word "ultimate" in the passage is closest in meaning to
fundamental
characteristic
various
immediate
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Experimental evidence suggests that for most birds, the physiological limits of egg production depend on the circumstances.
Experimental evidence suggests that most birds are physiologically capable of laying more eggs than they normally do.
Most experiments yield similar evidence about the extent to which egg laying is normally determined by the physiological limits of egg production.
Although some experiments suggest that birds lay as many eggs as they can, other, similar experiments suggest that this is not true for most birds.
According to paragraph 2, what is the difference between determinate layers and indeterminate layers?
Determinate layers typically have much smaller clutches than indeterminate layers do.
Determinate layers lay fewer eggs than they are capable of incubating, whereas indeterminate layers typically lay more eggs than they are capable of incubating.
Indeterminate layers typically build larger nests for their eggs than determinate layers do.
The number of eggs produced by an indeterminate laye depends on the circumstances, whereas the number of eggs produced by a determinate layer does not.
The word "potential" in the passage is closest in meaning to
additional
practical
possible
serious
According to paragraph 3, what was Lack's idea about clutch size?
As the size of a clutch decreases, it becomes increasingly likely that all the eggs in the clutch will hatch successfully.
The number of eggs in a normal clutch depends on the number of chicks that the parents are likely to be able to feed.
If parents are not able to feed a large number of chicks, future generations will adapt to make this possible.
Clutch size varies significantly. depending on the likely availability of food for the chicks once they have hatched.
Select the TWO answer choices that, according to paragraph 4, explain why increasing clutch size can actually reduce the number of a birds descendants. To receive credit, you must select Two answers.
The energy costs involved in producing the additional eggs could reduce the bird's capacity to produce high quality eggs in the future.
Larger clutch size means that more energy must be spent on predator avoidance, thus reducing the total energy available for feeding nestlings.
The increased energy used for feeding the extra nestlings could threaten the adults' survival to the next breeding season.
When adults are unable to feed the larger number of nestlings adequately the nestlings might be less able to survive.
What is the main purpose of paragraph 5?
To show that Lack's hypothesis is supported by experimental results
To argue that Lack's hypothesis applies only to birds that feed on insects
To illustrate how difficult it is to test an ecological hypothesis such as Lack's
To provide an example to show how useful the economic approach can be in evaluating an Ecologicahypothesis such as Lack's
According to paragraph 5, what generally happens when bluetits' broods have chicks added to them?
The adults generally do not feed the chicks that have been added.
Fewer chicks survive than survive from a normal-sized brood.
The blue tits switch to insects as a source of food for the extra chicks.
The blue tits react in a way that maximizes their reproductive potential.

In 1841 Edward Forbes was offered the chance to serve as naturalist aboard HMS Beacon, an English Royal Navy ship assigned to survey the Aegean Sea. For a year and a half the Beacon crisscrossed the Aegean waters. During that time Forbes was able to drag this small, triangular dredge - a tool with a leather net for capturing creatures along the sea bottom - at a hundred locations, at depths ranging from 6 to 1380 feet. He collected hundreds of different species of animals, and he saw that they were distributed in eight different depth zones, each containing its own distinct assemblage of animal life, the way zones of elevation on the side of a mountain are populated by distinct sets of plants.
Forbes also thought he saw, as he later told the British Association, that "the number of species and individuals diminishes as we descend, pointing to a zero in the distribution of animal life as yet unvisited." This zero, Forbes casually speculated-he simply extended a line on his graph of animal number versus depth-probably began at a depth of 1,800 feet. Below that was the final zone in Forbes's scheme, zone nine, a zone that covered most of the ocean floor and thus most of the solid surface of Earth: Forbes called this the azoic zone, where no animal, to say nothing of plants, could survive.
Forbes's azoic zone was entirely plausible at the time, and it was certainly far from the strangest idea that was then entertained about the deep sea. In the first decade of the nineteenth century, a French naturalist named Francois Peron had sailed around the world measuring the temperature of the ocean. He found that the deeper the water, the colder it got, and he concluded that the seafloor was covered with a thick layer of ice.  Peron ignored the fact that water expands when it freezes and that ice therefore floats.  A more popular belief at the time was that water at great depth would be compressed to such a density that nothing could sink through it.  This ignored the fact that water is all but incompressible.  But even the more sensible naturalists of the day were guilty of a similar misconception. They imagined the deep sea as being filled with an unmoving and undisturbable pool of cold, dense water. In reality the deep is always being refreshed by cold water sinking from above.
The central implication of all these misconceptions was that nothing could live in the abyss (deep), just as Forbes's observations seemed to indicate. But Forbes erred in two ways. One was the particular study site he happened to use as a springboard for his sweeping postulate of a lifeless abyss. Although the Aegean had been the birthplace of marine biology, its depths are now known to be exceptionally lacking in animal diversity. Moreover, through no fault of his own, Forbes was not particularly successful at sampling such life as did exist at the bottom of the Aegean. It was his dredge that was inadequate. Its opening was so small and the holes in the net so large that the dredge inevitably missed animals. Many of those it did catch must have poured out of its open mouth when Forbes reeled it in. His azoic zone, then, was a plausible but wild extrapolation from pioneering but feeble data.
As it turned out, the existence of the azoic zone had been disproved even before Forbes suggested it, and the theory continued to be contradicted regularly throughout its long and influential life. Searching for the Northwest Passage from the Atlantic to the Pacific in 1818, Sir John Ross had lowered his "deep-sea clam"a sort of bivalved sediment scoop-into the water of Baffin Bay ( an inlet between the Atlantic and Arctic oceans), which the determined to be more than a thousand fathoms deep in some places. Modern soundings indicate he overestimated his depths by several hundred fathoms, but in any case Ross's clam dove several times deeper than Forbes's dredge. It brought back mud laced with worms, and starfish that dad entangled themselves in the line at depths well below the supposed boundary of the azoic zone.
 
According to paragraph 1, why was the HMS Beacon in the Aegean Sea?
To capture creatures along the sea bottom.
To provide Forbes with transportation back and forth across the Aegean.
To test the effectiveness of a new type of dredge.
To carry out a survey of the Aegean Sea.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways for leave out essential information.
The hundreds of different species of animals Forbes collected fell into eight distinct groups, each associated with a different depth zone.
Forbes realized that depth zones, like elevation zones, contain hundreds of different species.
By collecting hundreds of different animals on land and sea, Forbes discovered that there were eight elevation zones and eight depth zones.
In addition to collecting different species of animals in eight ocean zones, Forbes collected different species of plants in eight mountain zones.
Why does the author mention that Forbes "extended a line on his graph of animal number versus depth"?
To indicate how Forbes concluded that some forms of animal life in the depths of the ocean had never been seen before.
To help explain how Forbes arrived at his theory of the azoic zone.
To make the point that Forbes was a well-trained professional.
To show how naturalists of Forbes's time carried out their research.
According to paragraph 2, what did Forbes believe about the possibility of life on the ocean floor deeper than 1,800 feet deep?
No plants or animals could live there.
Only plants could live there.
Only animals could live there.
It was not possible to say whether any plants or animals could live there.
According to paragraph 3, what was wrong with Francois Peron's conclusion?
It was based on inaccurate temperature measurements.
It assumed that the deeper the water, the colder it got.
It did not take into account the fact that ice floats.
It overlooked the fact that the sea is deeper in some places than in others.
The word "sensible" in the passage is closest in meaning to
famous
highly trained
reasonable
experienced
The word "exceptionally" in the passage is closet in meaning to
surprisingly
extraordinarily
frequently
specifically
According to paragraph 4, what did all the ideas about the deep sea discussed in paragraph 3 have in common?
They were all based on Forbes's observations.
They all challenged Forbes's theory.
They all presented the deep sea as lifeless.
They all underestimated the depth of the sea.
According to paragraph 4, what was one mistake that Forbes made?
He assumed that Aegean's depths and other oceans' depths had comparable animal diversity.
He placed too much importance on the fact the Aegean had been the birthplace of marine biology.
He failed to notice that his samples of marine life mostly came from the sea bottom and were not typical of life-forms at higher levels.
He did not realize that the seafloor in many parts of Earth is much deeper than it is in Aegean.
According to paragraph 4, Forbes's dredge had each of the following problems EXCEPT:
It opening was too small to collect certain kinds of animals.
The holes in its net were so large that animals could escape through them.
It could not get all the way down to the Aegean seafloor to sample the animals there.
Many animals were lost out of its open mouth when it was pulled up.
The word "inevitably" in the passage is closet in meaning to
frequently
necessarily
unpredictably
unfortunately
Paragraph 5 strongly suggests which of the following about Forbes and Ross?
Forbes got the idea for his dredge from Ross's deep-sea clam.
Forbes did not know about the discoveries Ross had made in Baffin Bay with help of his deep-sea clam.
Forbes carried out his investigations in the Aegean partly to disprove Ross's theory about the possibility of life in a abyss.
Forbes overestimated the depths of the seas and oceans he studied while Ross's calculations were as accurate as those provided by modern soundings.

Seismic waves-energy waves produced by earthquakes-permit scientists to determine the location, thickness, and properties of Earth's internal zones.  They are generated when rock masses are suddenly disturbed, such as when they break or rupture.  Vibrations spread out in all directions from the source of the disturbance, traveling at different speeds through parts of Earth's crust and interior that differ in chemical composition and physical properties.  The principal categories of these waves are primary, secondary, and surface.  All three types of waves are recorded on an instrument called a seismograph.
Primary waves, or P-waves, are the speediest of the three kinds of waves and therefore the first to arrive at a seismograph station after there has been an earthquake.  They travel through the upper crust of Earth at speeds of 4 to 5 kilometers per second, but near the base of the crust they speed along at 6 or 7 kilometers per second.  In these primary waves, pulses of energy are transmitted as a succession of compressions and expansions that parallel the direction of propagation of the wave itself.  Thus, a given segment of rock set in motion during an earthquake is driven into its neighbor and bounces back.  The neighbor strikes the next particle and rebounds and subsequent particles continue the motion.  Vibrational energy is an accordion-like push-pull movement that can be transmitted through solids, liquids and gases.   Of course, the speed of Pwave transmission will differ in materials of different density and elastic properties.
Secondary waves, or S-waves, travel 1 to2 kilometers per second slower than do P-waves.  Unlike the movement of P-waves, rock vibration in secondary waves is at right angles to the direction of propagation of the energy.  This type of wave is easily demonstrated by tying a length of rope to a hook and then shaking the free end.  A series of undulations will develop in the rope and move toward the hook-that is, in the direction of propagation.  Any given particle along the rope, however, will move up and down in a direction perpendicular to the direction of propagation.  It is because of their more complex motion that S-waves travel more slowly than Pwaves.  They are the second group of oscillations to arrive at a seismograph station.  Unlike Pwaves, secondary waves will not pass through liquids or gases.
Both P- and S-waves are sometimes also termed body waves because they are able to penetrate deep into the interior or body of our planet.  Body waves travel faster in rocks of greater elasticity, and their speeds therefore increase steadily as they move downward into more elastic zones of Earth's interior and then decrease as they begin to make their ascent toward Earth's surface.  The change in velocity that occurs as body waves invade rocks of different elasticity results in a bending or refraction of the wave.  The many small refractions cause the body waves to assume a curved travel path through Earth.
Not only are body waves subjected to refraction, but they may also be partially reflected off the surface of a dense rock layer in much the same way as light is reflected off a polished surface.  Many factors influence the behavior of body waves.  An increase in the temperature of rocks through which body waves are traveling will cause a decrease in velocity, whereas an increase in confining pressure will cause a corresponding increase in wave velocity.  In a fluid where no rigidity exists, S-waves cannot propagate and P-waves are markedly slowed.
Surface waves are large-motion waves that travel through the outer crust of Earth.  Their pattern of movement resembles that of waves caused when a pebble is tossed into the center of a pond.  They develop whenever P- or S-waves disturb the surface of Earth as they emerge from the interior.  Surface waves are the last to arrive at a seismograph station.  They are usually the primary cause of the destruction that can result from earthquakes affecting densely populated areas.  This destruction results because surface waves are channeled through the thin outer region of Earth, and their energy is less rapidly scattered into the large volumes of rock traversed by body waves.
 
Paragraph 2 indicates that compared to P-waves traveling through Earth's upper crust, Pwaves traveling near the base of Earth's crust
move at higher speeds
are more likely to reach a seismograph station
are less likely to cause an earthquake
are less likely to undergo compression
According to paragraph 3, the main reason that S-waves travel more slowly than P-waves do is that S-waves
lack a consistent direction
do not spread through gases or liquids
are produced by the movement of P-waves
move in a more complex way than P-waves
In paragraph 3, the author presents the characteristics of S-waves by
comparing and contrasting S-waves and P-waves
arguing that S-waves mostly behave like P-waves
introducing new research findings about how S-waves move
contrasting past and present understandings of how S-waves behave
The word "invade" in the passage is closest in meaning to
break
enter
escape from
pass over
Which of the following can be inferred about body waves from paragraph 4?
P-and S-waves are restricted to Earth's deep interior.
The refraction of a body wave causes the wave to change its speed.
A body wave changes its velocity and direction many times as it passes through Earth.
Body waves become more elastic as they move deeper into Earth and less elastic as they move toward Earth's surface.
According to paragraph 5, body waves travel more slowly through a mass of rock if the rock is
at a high temperature
under high pressure
covered with fluid
not particularly dense
According to paragraph 6. why do surface waves create much of the destruction caused by an earthquake?
The energy of surface waves diminishes relatively slowly as they travel through the outer crust of Earth.
The regions in which surface waves tend to be strongest are areas with unusually large human populations.
Surface waves travel at a more rapid rate than do P- or S-waves.
Surface waves reach locations on the surface of Earth sooner than do the body waves coming from that earthquake.
According to paragraph 6, surface waves differ from body waves in which of the following ways?
Surface waves are more regular in their motion than are body waves.
Surface waves are generated later than are body waves.
Surface waves travel through larger volumes of rock than do body waves.
Surface waves lose speed much faster than do body waves.

Corals belong to a group of animals called cnidarians. This group encompasses hard and soft corals, sea fans, gorgonians, hydroids, jellyfish, and sea anemones. Although the group is remarkably diverse, there are a few features shared by all. They have a free-swimming larval stage and a simple body plan: a central mouth, through which material passes in and out of the body, and a ring of tentacles. The other distinguishing feature of the cnidarians is the presence of nematocysts (stinging cells), which are used to catch prey.
 Individual corals are known as coral polyps; each is a single animal. In isolation a coral polyp looks very similar to a sea anemone, but unlike sea anemones, which live separated from each other, corals form colonies.  A few species remain solitary, but in most cases, new polyps bud off the initial founding polyp, and gradually colonies of thousands or even millions of polyps will grow, each connected to its neighbors by living tissue.  Freed from the limitations of living alone, colonies can grow to immense sizes and live a very long time. 
Corals come in all shapes and sizes, but the basic plan is the same; polyps live as a surface layer on some sort of structure, be it hard and inflexible or rubbery. The hard, or true corals, for which reefs are most famous, build limestone skeletons beneath the living tissue. Soft corals, as their name implies, do not form solid skeletons; instead they secrete limestone crystal structures called sclerites, which are embedded within a jellylike matrix beneath the polyps. When they die, little is left of most soft corals as the limestone element of their makeup is so small and easily breaks up.
By contrast, some sea whips and fans and, notably, the black corals, have such dense skeletons of limestone, protein, and minerals that they are highly durable and are collected and polished for jewelry. The skeleton of black corals is more dense the slower it grows, and it grows more slowly at depth. So it is the very deep, older colonies that are most highly prize.
Coral reefs would not exist if it were not for the ability of coral polyps to secrete limestone or calcium carbonate. Sea water surrounding a coral is very rich in dissolved calcium carbonate, but the fluid inside the polyp cannot retain a large quantity of calcium carbonate, so it is laid down as microscopic needle-shaped crystals beneath and around the polyp. This process occurs in two stages. As the polyp expands to feed with its tentacles at night, it lifts off the skeleton, rather like a glove coming part way off a hand. At this stage, the calcium carbonate crystals form ridges. During the following day (when the coral polyp is retracted and lying on its new structure), the valleys between the ridges fill in with more calcium carbonate and the skeleton takes on a smoother appearance. Because the skeleton of hard corals is made of limestone or calcium carbonate, it is pure white.
Each coral species lays down its skeleton in a different way. This gives rise to the extraordinary range of shapes and forms that hard corals take. Some form large boulders, where the polyps live in small, isolated depressions or grooves in the skeleton. Some grow in branches, which can be small and stubby, while others are spreading, treelike structures. Still others grow delicate, leaflike plates or flat tables. The range is huge, and to complicate the matter further, the same species will grow in a different way depending on the physical characteristics of the place in which it finds itself. Although a corals genetic blueprint is fundamental in determining what it looks like, its appearance is also affected by waves, currents, light, and competition for space on the reef. Such variations in coral form have complicated the matter of identification over the years.
 
According to paragraph 1, which of the following is true about the group of animals called cnidarians?
Its members are remarkably similar in appearance.
They are unable to catch their own food.
They can swim in their earliest stages of life.
They have highly complex bodies.
According to paragraph 2, what do corals and sea anemones have in common?
The individuals of both species resemble each other.
They both form large colonies.
The individuals of both species are called polyps.
They both live very long lives.
Which of the following can be inferred about coral reefs from paragraph 3?
They are only found on hard structures.
The most famous ones are supported by solid skeletons.
They require sclerites to live.
The jellylike matrix within them contains no limestone.
The author mentions sea whips, fans, and black corals in paragraph 4 as examples of
cnidarians that are especially difficult to find
cnidarians whose skeletons do not easily break up
the many different kinds of corals that exist
reefs formed by soft corals
According to paragraphs 3 and 4, the corals considered to be the most valuable are those that
secrete limestone crystal structures
attach themselves to rubbery surfaces
contain little limestone
grow in the deepest waters
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Calcium carbonate from surrounding sea water is stored inside a coral polyp in the form of small microscopic-shaped crystals.
Since only a small amount of calcium carbonate can be stored inside a coral polyp, it is also stored outside it.
The fluid inside a coral polyp is richer in calcium carbonate than the surrounding crystals containing calcium carbonate.
Calcium carbonate does not exist in crystal form in seawater, but it is found in that form inside coral polyps.
The author mentions a glove in paragraph 5 in order to explain
how many tentacles polyps have
how polyps feed
how polyps protect themselves
why corals are beautiful
The phrase gives rise to in the passage is closest in meaning to
alters
causes
increases
builds on


The Pacific Ocean accounts for one-third of Earths surface and half of the worlds
ocean area. It has about 25,000 islands, of which about 7,500 are oceanic, being
relatively far from a continental shore. The great majority of all Pacific islands were
born barren of life: hard, dense, volcanic rock pimples on the sea's surface. New
Zealand is the chief exception; it is among the continental islands of the western
Pacific, together with Fiji, the Solomons, and others to the west.

Life arrived on most other islands by accident or by drift. Some plants arrived by air transport; seeds carried in the digestive tracts of birds account for nearly 40 percent of Hawaii's early plants. The first invaders were either creatures that could float well enough, in air or water, to cross stretches of ocean, or those whose seeds could survive a voyage in some bird's gut.  At times of lower sea level, land bridges linked, or nearly linked, many islands in the far western Pacific, so some species colonized these islands without being notably good floaters or stowaways.  In the eastern Pacific (Easter Island, for example) only the best floaters and travelers arrived and survived.  Consequently, the western islands have far more species and far greater biodiversity than do the eastern islands of Polynesia.  Mammals found it hard to get anywhere in the island Pacific; only bats and rats successfully colonized east of New Guinea. Almost all species derive from Asia; the early Pacific was an Asian lake, with only a tiny proportion of species from the Americas. As a rule of thumb, the further from Indonesia, the more impoverished the plant and animal life and, in consequence, the less stable and resilient in the face of disturbance. This attenuation is strong for land species, less strong for marine species, and nonexistent for oceanic birds, although fairly strong for land birds.
Pacific ecosystems evolved in relative (but differential) isolation from the continental crucibles of biological evolution. This meant opportunities for speciation: the development of new species occupying ecological niches that elsewhere were already filled. The finches described by the naturalist Charles Darwin on the Galapagos Islandsbirds that divided into different species, each specialized for a narrow nicheare the classic example. On islands that had no mammals, reptiles and birds took their place. Thus the Galapagos have giant tortoises, and New Zealand once had giant birds that functioned more or less like browsing or grazing mammals. Throughout most of the Pacific, the paucity of grazing animals meant that plants developed no defenses, such as spines, poisonous chemicals, or bitterness. The remoter islands had a very high proportion of endemismthat isof species that existed only there. In the case of Hawaii, as many as 99 percent of the species were endemic. All this led to a certain biological vulnerability among the terrestrial island species, should they ever be obliged to compete for niche space with the winners of the more intense continental competitions for survival. This vulnerability increased toward the east and toward the remoter corners of the Pacific along a gradient defined chiefly by the degree of isolation.
A second source of vulnerability, perhaps more decisive, arose from the arrival of humankind in the Pacific. Island animals evolved with no experience of the ways of humankind, or indeed of any large terrestrial predators. As a result, they had no immunities to predators or the effects of human action. Pacific animals were often unwary and easy prey. At the extreme, again the Galapagos, Darwin found many birds almost tame, so naively trusting that they would allow him to get within arms reach. Pacific plants had little experience with fire, because natural fires were very rare, except in a few places. Thus few plants were well adapted to fire, and most proved vulnerable to it. In contrast, continental species that had evolved in the presence of humankind, or in places where natural fire is much more common, could recover easily after burns, and some could flourish as a result of fire. In short, Pacific ecosystems were different from continental ones on account of their isolation. They were well adapted to their circumstances but very vulnerable to alien invasion and human impact.
 
The main purpose of paragraph 1 is to
introduce the major ideas that will be discussed in the passage
explain how the Pacific Ocean differs from other oceans
impress on the audience the large number of islands the Pacific Ocean contains
provide relevant geographical background to the topic of the passage
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlightedsentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways orleave out essential information.
When sea levels were low, land bridges that connected many islands in the far western Pacific were able to form.
Good floaters and stowaways were able to take advantage of land bridges at times of lower sea level.
Some species that could not invade in the usual way did so by crossing land bridges when sea levels dropped.
Colonizing the islands of the far western Pacific was accomplished by some species because they were good floaters or stowaways.
What can be inferred from the discussion about batsandrats in relation to other mammals?
Small mammals such as bats and rats could not travel as far as larger mammals could.
Bats and rats had advantages in crossing oceans that other mammals lacked.
Unlike other mammals, bats and rats originated in the Americas rather than Asia.
After colonizing a Pacific island, bats and rats adapted better to the ecosystems than other mammals did.
According to paragraph 2, why were mammals not common in the island Pacific?
It was nearly impossible for most mammals to travel from island to island.
Mammals tried to colonize the islands at a time when the land bridges were widely separated.
Because mammals are native to the Americas, they could not survive in the alien climate of the island Pacific.
The early plants of the island Pacific did not provide suitable food for mammals.
The author mentions "giant tortoises" and "giant birds" in paragraph 3 in order to
describe some unusual varieties of animals that evolved on the oceanic Pacific islands
contrast the diversity of animal life on the Galapagos and New Zealand to that of most other islands
illustrate that non-mammals evolved to fill niches that might otherwise have been filled by mammals
argue that Galapagos animals and New Zealand animals occupied similar ecological niche
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 3 about why plants in Pacific ecosystems did not develop defenses?
The fragile plants were not strong enough to support thick spines.
The absence of mammals that typically feed on plants meant that defenses were unnecessary.
Poisonous chemicals that might affect the plants were not present.
The plants were able to occupy niches in areas where there were no birds or tortoises.
The word tame in the passage is closest in meaning to
stupid
domesticated
careless
confident
In paragraph 4, the author mentions fire in relation to plants in order to make which of the following points?
Natural fires generally harmed but did not destroy plants in continental ecosystems.
Natural fires in the Pacific islands were difficult to control and caused the destruction of many plants.
Naturally occurring fires can be much more destructive of plant life than fires started by humans.
Plants on the Pacific islands had not evolved any mechanisms for coping with fire.

Plant communities assemble themselves flexibly, and their particular structure depends on the specific history of the area. Ecologists use the term succession to refer to the changes that happen in plant communities and ecosystems over time. The first community in a succession is called a pioneer community, while the long-lived community at the end of succession is called a climax community. Pioneer and successional plant communities are said to change over periods from 1 to 500 years. These changesin plant numbers and the mix of speciesare cumulative. Climax communities themselves change but over periods of time greater than about 500 years.
An ecologist who studies a pond today may well find it relatively unchanged in a years time. Individual fish may be replaced, but the number of fish will tend to be the same from one year to the next. We can say that the properties of an ecosystem are more stable than the individual organisms that compose the ecosystem.
At one time, ecologists believed that species diversity made ecosystems stable. They believed that the greater the diversity the more stable the ecosystem. Support for this idea came from the observation that long-lasting climax communities usually have more complex food webs and more species diversity than pioneer communities. Ecologists concluded that the apparent stability of climax ecosystems depended on their complexity. To take an extreme example, farmlands dominated by a single crop are so unstable that one year of bad weather or the invasion of a single pest can destroy the entire crop. In contrast, a complex climax community, such as a temperate forest, will tolerate considerable damage from weather to pests.
The question of ecosystem stability is complicated, however. The first problem is that ecologists do not all agree what stability means. Stability can be defined as simply lack of change. In that case, the climax community would be considered the most stable, since, by definition, it changes the least over time. Alternatively, stability can be defined as the speed with which an ecosystem returns to a particular form following a major disturbance, such as a fire. This kind of stability is also called resilience. In that case, climax communities would be the most fragile and the least stable, since they can require hundreds of years to return to the climax state.
Even the kind of stability defined as simple lack of change is not always associated with maximum diversity. At least in temperate zones, maximum diversity is often found in mid-successional stages, not in the climax community. Once a redwood forest matures, for example, the kinds of species and the number of individuals growing on the forest floor are reduced. In general, diversity, by itself, does not ensure stability. Mathematical models of ecosystems likewise suggest that diversity does not guarantee ecosystem stabilityjust the opposite, in fact. A more complicated system is, in general, more likely than a simple system to break down. A fifteen-speed racing bicycle is more likely to break down than a child's tricycle.
 Ecologists are especially interested to know what factors contribute to the resilience of communities because climax communities all over the world are being severely damaged or destroyed by human activities.  The destruction caused by the volcanic explosion of Mount St. Helens, in the northwestern United States, for example, pales in comparison to the destruction caused by humans.  We need to know what aspects of a community are most important to the communitys resistance to destruction, as well as its recovery. 
Many ecologists now think that the relative long-term stability of climax communities comes not from diversity but from the patchiness of the environment, an environment that varies from place to place supports more kinds of organisms than an environment that is uniform. A local population that goes extinct is quickly replaced by immigrants from an adjacent community. Even if the new population is of a different species, it can approximately fill the niche vacated by the extinct population and keep the food web intact.
 
The word particular in the passage is closest in meaning to
natural
final
specific
complex
According to paragraph 1, which of the following is NOT true of climax communities?
They occur at the end of a succession.
They last longer than any other type of community.
The numbers of plants in them and the mix of species do not change.
They remain stable for at least 500 years at a time.
According to paragraph 2, which of the following principles of ecosystems can be learned by studying a pond?
Ecosystem properties change more slowly than individuals in the system.
The stability of an ecosystem tends to change as individuals are replaced.
Individual organisms are stable from one year to the next.
A change in the members of an organism does not affect an ecosystems properties.
According to paragraph 3, ecologists once believed that which of the following illustrated the most stable ecosystems?
Pioneer communities
Climax communities
Single-crop farmlands
Successional plant communities
According to paragraph 4, why is the question of ecosystem stability complicated?
The reasons for ecosystem change are not always clear.
Ecologists often confuse the word stability with the word resilience.
The exact meaning of the word stability is debated by ecologists.
There are many different answers to ecological questions.
According to paragraph 4, which of the following is true of climax communities?
They are more resilient than pioneer communities.
They can be considered both the most and the least stable communities.
They are stable because they recover quickly after major disturbances.
They are the most resilient communities because they change the least over time.
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 5 about redwood forests?
They become less stable as they mature.
They support many species when they reach climax.
They are found in temperate zones.
They have reduced diversity during mid-successional stages.
The word guarantee in the passage is closest in meaning to
increase
ensure
favor
complicate
In paragraph 5, why does the author provide the information that A fifteen-speed racing bicycle is more likely to break down than a child's tricycle?
To illustrate a general principle about the stability of systems by using an everyday example
To demonstrate that an understanding of stability in ecosystems can be applied to help understand stability in other situations
To make a comparison that supports the claim that, in general, stability increases with diversity
To provide an example that contradicts mathematical models of ecosystems
The word pales in the passage is closest in meaning to
increases proportionally
differs
loses significance
is common
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incurred choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Ecologists now think that the stability of an environment is a result of diversity rather than patchiness.
Patchy environments that vary from place to place do not often have high species diversity.
Uniform environments cannot be climax communities because they do not support as many types of organisms as patchy environments.
A patchy environment is thought to increase stability because it is able to support a wide variety of organisms.
The word adjacent in the passage is closest in meaning to
foreign
stable
fluid
neighboring

The deserts, which already occupy approximately a fourth of the Earth's land surface, have in recent decades been increasing at an alarming pace. The expansion of desert-like conditions into areas where they did not previously exist is called desertification. It has been estimated that an additional one-fourth of the Earth's land surface is threatened by this process.
Desertification is accomplished primarily through the loss of stabilizing natural vegetation and the subsequent accelerated erosion of the soil by wind and water. In some cases the loose soil is blown completely away, leaving a stony surface. In other cases, the finer particles may be removed, while the sand-sized particles are accumulated to form mobile hills or ridges of sand.
Even in the areas that retain a soil cover, the reduction of vegetation typically results in the loss of the soil's ability to absorb substantial quantities of water. The impact of raindrops on the loose soil tends to transfer fine clay particles into the tiniest soil spaces, sealing them and producing a surface that allows very little water penetration. Water absorption is greatly reduced; consequently runoff is increased, resulting in accelerated erosion rates. The gradual drying of the soil caused by its diminished ability to absorb water results in the further loss of vegetation, so that a cycle of progressive surface deterioration is established.
In some regions, the increase in desert areas is occurring largely as the result of a trend toward drier climatic conditions. Continued gradual global warming has produced an increase in aridity for some areas over the past few thousand years. The process may be accelerated in subsequent decades if global warming resulting from air pollution seriously increases.
There is little doubt, however, that desertification in most areas results primarily from human activities rather than natural processes. The semiarid lands bordering the deserts exist in a delicate ecological balance and are limited in their potential to adjust to increased environmental pressures. Expanding populations are subjecting the land to increasing pressures to provide them with food and fuel. In wet periods, the land may be able to respond to these stresses. During the dry periods that are common phenomena along the desert margins, though, the pressure on the land is often far in excess of its diminished capacity, and desertification results.
Four specific activities have been identified as major contributors to the desertification processes: overcultivation, overgrazing, firewood gathering, and overirrigation. The cultivation of crops has expanded into progressively drier regions as population densities have grown. These regions are especially likely to have periods of severe dryness, so that crop failures are common. Since the raising of most crops necessitates the prior removal of the natural vegetation, crop failures leave extensive tracts of land devoid of a plant cover and susceptible to wind and water erosion.
 The raising of livestock is a major economic activity in semiarid lands, where grasses are generally the dominant type of natural vegetation.  The consequences of an excessive number of livestock grazing in an area are the reduction of the vegetation cover and the trampling and pulverization of the soil.  This is usually followed by the drying of the soil and accelerated erosion. 
Firewood is the chief fuel used for cooking and heating in many countries. The increased pressures of expanding populations have led to the removal of woody plants so that many cities and towns are surrounded by large areas completely lacking in trees and shrubs. The increasing use of dried animal waste as a substitute fuel has also hurt the soil because this valuable soil conditioner and source of plant nutrients is no longer being returned to the land.
The final major human cause of desertification is soil salinization resulting from overirrigation. Excess water from irrigation sinks down into the water table. If no drainage system exists, the water table rises, bringing dissolved salts to the surface. The water evaporates and the salts are left behind, creating a white crustal layer that prevents air and water from reaching the underlying soil.
The extreme seriousness of desertification results from the vast areas of land and the tremendous numbers of people affected, as well as from the great difficulty of reversing or even slowing the process. Once the soil has been removed by erosion, only the passage of centuries or millennia will enable new soil to form. In areas where considerable soil still remains, though, a rigorously enforced program of land protection and cover-crop planting may make it possible to reverse the present deterioration of the surface.
 
The word threatened in the passage is closest in meaning to
restricted
endangered
prevented
rejected
According to paragraph 3, the loss of natural vegetation has which of the following consequences for soil?
Increased stony content
Reduced water absorption
Increased numbers of spaces in the soil
Reduced water runoff
The word delicate in the passage is closest in meaning to
fragile
predictable
complex
valuable
According to paragraph 5, in dry periods, border areas have difficulty
adjusting to stresses created by settlement
retaining their fertility after desertification
providing water for irrigating crops
attracting populations in search of food and fuel
The word progressively in the passage is closest in meaning to
openly
impressively
objectively
increasingly
According to paragraph 6, which of the following is often associated with raising crops?
Lack of proper irrigation techniques
Failure to plant crops suited to the particular area
Removal of the original vegetation
Excessive use of dried animal waste
The phrase devoid of in the passage is closest in meaning to
consisting of
hidden by
except for
lacking in
According to paragraph 9, the grounds absorption of excess water is a factor in desertification because it can
interfere with the irrigation of land
limit the evaporation of water
require more absorption of air by the soil
bring salts to the surface
All of the following are mentioned in the passage as contributing to desertification EXCEPT
soil erosion
global warming
insufficient irrigation
the raising of livestock
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Desertification is a significant problem because it is so hard to reverse and affects large areas of land and great numbers of people.
Slowing down the process of desertification is difficult because of population growth that has spread over large areas of land.
The spread of deserts is considered a very serious problem that can be solved only if large numbers of people in various countries are involved in the effort.
Desertification is extremely hard to reverse unless the population is reduced in the vast areas affected.
It can be inferred from the passage that the author most likely believes which of the following about the future of desertification?
Governments will act quickly to control further desertification.
The factors influencing desertification occur in cycles and will change in the future.
Desertification will continue to increase.
Desertification will soon occur in all areas of the world.

 
It should be obvious that cetaceanswhales, porpoises, and dolphinsare mammals. They breathe through lungs, not through gills, and give birth to live young.
Their streamlined bodies, the absence of hind legs, and the presence of a fluke and blowhole cannot disguise their affinities with land dwelling mammals. However, unlike the cases of sea otters and pinnipeds (seals, sea lions, and walruses, whose limbs are functional both on land and at sea), 
it is not easy to envision what the first whales looked like. Extinct but already fully marine cetaceans are known from the fossil record.  How was the gap between a walking mammal and a swimming whale bridged?
 Missing until recently were fossils clearly intermediate, or transitional, between land mammals and cetaceans.

 Very exciting discoveries have finally allowed scientists to reconstruct the most likely origins of cetaceans.  In 1979, a team looking for fossils in northern Pakistan found what proved to be the oldest fossil whale. The fossil was officially named Pakicetus in honor of the country where the discovery was made. Pakicetus was found embedded in rocks formed from river deposits that were 52 million years old. The river that formed these deposits was actually not far from an ancient ocean known as the Tethys Sea.
The fossil consists of a complete skull of an archaeocyte, an extinct group of ancestors of modern cetaceans. Although limited to a skull, the Pakicetus fossil provides precious details on the origins of cetaceans. The skull is cetacean-like but its jawbones lack the enlarged space that is filled with fat or oil and used for receiving underwater sound in modern whales. Pakicetus probably detected sound through the ear opening as in land mammals. The skull also lacks a blowhole, another cetacean adaptation for diving. Other features, however, show experts that Pakicetus is a transitional form between a group of extinct flesh-eating mammals, the mesonychids, and cetaceans. It has been suggested that Pakicetus fed on fish in shallow water and was not yet adapted for life in the open ocean. It probably bred and gave birth on land.
Another major discovery was made in Egypt in 1989. Several skeletons of another early whale, Basilosaurus, were found in sediments left by the Tethys Sea and now exposed in the Sahara desert. This whale lived around 40 million years ago, 12 million years after Pakicetus. Many incomplete skeletons were found but they included, for the first time in an archaeocyte, a complete hind leg that features a foot with three tiny toes. Such legs would have been far too small to have supported the 50-foot-long Basilosaurus on land. Basilosaurus was undoubtedly a fully marine whale with possibly nonfunctional, or vestigial, hind legs.
An even more exciting find was reported in 1994, also from Pakistan. The now extinct whale Ambulocetus natans ("the walking whale that swam") lived in the Tethys Sea 49 million years ago. It lived around 3 million years after Pakicetus but 9 million before Basilosaurus. The fossil luckily includes a good portion of the hind legs. The legs were strong and ended in long feet very much like those of a modern pinniped. The legs were certainly functional both on land and at sea. The whale retained a tail and lacked a fluke, the major means of locomotion in modern cetaceans. The structure of the backbone shows, however, that Ambulocetus swam like modern whales by moving the rear portion of its body up and down, even though a fluke was missing. The large hind legs were used for propulsion in water. On land, where it probably bred and gave birth, Ambulocetus may have moved around very much like a modern sea lion. It was undoubtedly a whale that linked life on land with life at sea.
 
In paragraph 1, what does the author say about the presence of a blowhole in cetaceans?
It clearly indicates that cetaceans are mammals.
It cannot conceal the fact that cetaceans are mammals.
It is the main difference between cetaceans and land-dwelling mammals.
It cannot yield clues about the origins of cetaceans.
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 1 about early sea otters?
It is not difficult to imagine what they looked like.
There were great numbers of them.
They lived in the sea only.
They did not leave many fossil remains.
The word precious in the passage is closest in meaning to
exact
scarce
valuable
initial
Pakicetus and modern cetaceans have similar
hearing structures
adaptations for diving
skull shapes
breeding locations
The word It in the passage refers to
Pakicetus
fish
life
ocean
The word exposed in the passage is closest in meaning to
explained
visible
identified
located
The hind leg of Basilosaurus was a significant find because it showed that Basilosaurus
lived later than Ambulocetus natans
lived at the same time as Pakicetus
was able to swim well
could not have walked on land
It can be inferred that Basilosaurus bred and gave birth in which of the following locations
On land
Both on land and at sea
In shallow water
In a marine environment
Why does the author use the word luckily in mentioning that the Ambulocetus natans fossil included hind legs?
Fossil legs of early whales are a rare find.
The legs provided important information about the evolution of cetaceans.
The discovery allowed scientists to reconstruct a complete skeleton of the whale.
Until that time, only the front legs of early whales had been discovered.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Even though Ambulocetus swam by moving its body up and down, it did not have a backbone.
The backbone of Ambulocetus, which allowed it to swim, provides evidence of its missing fluke.
Although Ambulocetus had no fluke, its backbone structure shows that it swam like modern whales.
By moving the rear parts of their bodies up and down, modern whales swim in a different way from the way Ambulocetus swam.
The word propulsion in the passage is closest in meaning to
staying afloat
changing direction
decreasing weight
moving forward

The cinema did not emerge as a form of mass consumption until its technology evolved from the initial "peepshow" format to the point where images were projected on a screen in a darkened theater. In the peepshow format, a film was viewed through a small opening in a machine that was created for that purpose. Thomas Edison's peepshow device, the Kinetoscope, was introduced to the public in 1894. It was designed for use in Kinetoscope parlors, or arcades, which contained only a few individual machines and permitted only one customer to view a short, 50-foot film at any one time. The first Kinetoscope parlors contained five machines. For the price of 25 cents (or 5 cents per machine), customers moved from machine to machine to watch five different films (or, in the case of famous prizefights, successive rounds of a single fight).
These Kinetoscope arcades were modeled on phonograph parlors, which had proven successful for Edison several years earlier. In the phonograph parlors, customers listened to recordings through individual ear tubes, moving from one machine to the next to hear different recorded speeches or pieces of music. The Kinetoscope parlors functioned in a similar way. Edison was more interested in the sale of Kinetoscopes (for roughly $1,000 apiece) to these parlors than in the films that would be run in them (which cost approximately $10 to $15 each). He refused to develop projection technology, reasoning that if he made and sold projectors, then exhibitors would purchase only one machine-a projector-from him instead of several.
 Exhibitors, however, wanted to maximize their profits, which they could do more readily by projecting a handful of films to hundreds of customers at a time (rather than one at a time) and by charging 25 to 50 cents admission.  About a year after the opening of the first Kinetoscope parlor in 1894, showmen such as Louis and Auguste Lumiere, Thomas Armat and Charles Francis Jenkins, and Orville and Woodville Latham (with the assistance of Edison's former assistant, William Dickson) perfected projection devices.  These early projection devices were used in vaudeville theaters, legitimate theaters, local town halls, makeshift storefront theaters, fairgrounds, and amusement parks to show films to a mass audience. 
With the advent of projection in 1895-1896, motion pictures became the ultimate form of mass consumption. Previously, large audiences had viewed spectacles at the theater, where vaudeville, popular dramas, musical and minstrel shows, classical plays, lectures, and slide-and-lantern shows had been presented to several hundred spectators at a time. But the movies differed significantly from these other forms of entertainment, which depended on either live performance or (in the case of the slide-and-lantern shows) the active involvement of a master of ceremonies who assembled the final program.
Although early exhibitors regularly accompanied movies with live acts, the substance of the movies themselves is mass-produced, prerecorded material that can easily be reproduced by theaters with little or no active participation by the exhibitor. Even though early exhibitors shaped their film programs by mixing films and other entertainments together in whichever way they thought would be most attractive to audiences or by accompanying them with lectures, their creative control remained limited. What audiences came to see was the technological marvel of the movies; the lifelike reproduction of the commonplace motion of trains, of waves striking the shore, and of people walking in the street; and the magic made possible by trick photography and the manipulation of the camera.
With the advent of projection, the viewer's relationship with the image was no longer private, as it had been with earlier peepshow devices such as the Kinetoscope and the Mutoscope, which was a similar machine that reproduced motion by means of successive images on individual photographic cards instead of on strips of celluloid. It suddenly became publican experience that the viewer shared with dozens, scores, and even hundreds of others. At the same time, the image that the spectator looked at expanded from the minuscule peepshow dimensions of 1 or 2 inches (in height) to the life-size proportions of 6 or 9 feet.
 
According to paragraph 1, all of the following were true of viewing films in Kinetoscope parlors EXCEPT:
One individual at a time viewed a film.
Customers could view one film after another.
Prizefights were the most popular subjects for films.
Each film was short.
The author discusses phonograph parlors in paragraph 2 in order to
explain Edison's financial success
describe the model used to design Kinetoscope parlors
contrast their popularity to that of Kinetoscope parlors
illustrate how much more technologically advanced Kinetoscope parlors were
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence from the passage? Incorrect answer choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Edison was more interested in developing a variety of machines than in developing a technology based on only one.
Edison refused to work on projection technology because he did not think exhibitors would replace their projectors with newer machines.
Edison did not want to develop projection technology because it limited the number of machines he could sell.
Edison would not develop projection technology unless exhibitors agreed to purchase more than one projector from him.
The word readily in the passage is closest in meaning to
frequently
easily
intelligently
obviously
The word assistance in the passage is closest in meaning to
criticism
leadership
help
approval
According to paragraph 4, how did the early movies differ from previous spectacles that were presented to large audiences?
They were a more expensive form of entertainment.
They were viewed by larger audiences.
They were more educational.
They did not require live entertainers.
According to paragraph 5, what role did early exhibitors play in the presentation of movies in theaters?
They decided how to combine various components of the film program.
They advised film-makers on appropriate movie content.
They often took part in the live-action performances.
They produced and prerecorded the material that was shown in the theaters.
Which of the following is mentioned in paragraph 6 as one of the ways the Mutoscope differed from the Kinetoscope?
Sound and motion were simultaneously produced in the Mutoscope.
More than one person could view the images at the same time with the Mutoscope.
The Mutoscope was a less sophisticated earlier prototype of the Kinetoscope.
A different type of material was used to produce the images used in the Mutoscope.
The word It in the passage refers to
The advent of projection
The viewer's relationship with the image
A similar machine
Celluloid
According to paragraph 6, the images seen by viewers in the earlier peepshows, compared to the images projected on the screen, were relatively
Small in size
Inexpensive to create
Unfocused
Limited in subject matter
The word expanded in the passage is closest in meaning to
was enlarged
was improved
was varied
was rejected

Groundwater is the word used to describe water that saturates the ground, filling all the available spaces. By far the most abundant type of groundwater is meteoric water; this is the groundwater that circulates as part of the water cycle. Ordinary meteoric water is water that has soaked into the ground from the surface, from precipitation (rain and snow) and from lakes and streams. There it remains, sometimes for long periods, before emerging at the surface again. At first thought it seems incredible that there can be enough space in the solid ground underfoot to hold all this water.
The necessary space is there, however, in many forms. The commonest spaces are those among the particlessand grains and tiny pebblesof loose, unconsolidated sand and gravel. Beds of this material, out of sight beneath the soil, are common. They are found wherever fast rivers carrying loads of coarse sediment once flowed. For example, as the great ice sheets that covered North America during the last ice age steadily melted away, huge volumes of water flowed from them. The water was always laden with pebbles, gravel, and sand, known as glacial outwash, that was deposited as the flow slowed down.
The same thing happens to this day, though on a smaller scale, wherever a sediment-laden river or stream emerges from a mountain valley onto relatively flat land, dropping its load as the current slows: the water usually spreads out fanwise, depositing the sediment in the form of a smooth, fan-shaped slope. Sediments are also dropped where a river slows on entering a lake or the sea, the deposited sediments are on a lake floor or the seafloor at first, but will be located inland at some future date, when the sea level falls or the land rises; such beds are sometimes thousands of meters thick.
In lowland country almost any spot on the ground may overlie what was once the bed of a river that has since become buried by soil; if they are now below the waters upper surface (the water table), the gravels and sands of the former riverbed, and its sandbars, will be saturated with groundwater.
So much for unconsolidated sediments. Consolidated (or cemented) sediments, too, contain millions of minute water-holding pores. This is because the gaps among the original grains are often not totally plugged with cementing chemicals; also, parts of the original grains may become dissolved by percolating groundwater, either while consolidation is taking place or at any time afterwards. The result is that sandstone, for example, can be as porous as the loose sand from which it was formed.
Thus a proportion of the total volume of any sediment, loose or cemented, consists of empty space. Most crystalline rocks are much more solid; a common exception is basalt, a form of solidified volcanic lava, which is sometimes full of tiny bubbles that make it very porous.
The proportion of empty space in a rock is known as its porosity. But note that porosity is not the same as permeability, which measures the ease with which water can flow through a material; this depends on the sizes of the individual cavities and the crevices linking them.
Much of the water in a sample of water-saturated sediment or rock will drain from it if the sample is put in a suitable dry place.  But some will remain, clinging to all solid surfaces.  It is held there by the force of surface tension without which water would drain instantly from any wet surface, leaving it totally dry.  The total volume of water in the saturated sample must therefore be thought of as consisting of water that can, and water that cannot, drain away. 
The relative amount of these two kinds of water varies greatly from one kind of rock or sediment to another, even though their porosities may be the same. What happens depends on pore size. If the pores are large, the water in them will exist as drops too heavy for surface tension to hold, and it will drain away; but if the pores are small enough, the water in them will exist as thin films, too light to overcome the force of surface tension holding them in place; then the water will be firmly held.
 
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 1 about the ground that we walk on?
It cannot hold rainwater for long periods of time.
It prevents most groundwater from circulating.
It has the capacity to store large amounts of water.
It absorbs most of the water it contains from rivers.
The word incredible in the passage is closest in meaning to
confusing
comforting
unbelievable
interesting
The word out of sight in the passage is closest in meaning to
far away
hidden
partly visible
discovered
According to paragraph 2, where is groundwater usually found?
Inside pieces of sand and gravel
On top of beds of rock
In fast rivers that are flowing beneath the soil
In spaces between pieces of sediment
The phrase glacial outwash in the passage refers to
fast rivers
glaciers
the huge volumes of water created by glacial melting
the particles carried in water from melting glaciers
All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 3 as places that sediment-laden rivers can deposit their sediments EXCEPT
A mountain valley
Flat land
A lake floor
The seafloor
The word overlie in the passage is closest in meaning to
cover
change
separate
surround
The phrase So much for in the passage is closest in meaning to
that is enough about
now let us turn to
of greater concern are
this is related to
The word plugged in the passage is closet in meaning to
washed
dragged
filled up
soaked through
According to paragraphs 6 and 7, why is basalt unlike most crystalline forms of rock?
It is unusually solid.
It often has high porosity.
It has a low proportion of empty space.
It is highly permeable.
What is the main purpose of paragraph 7?
To explain why water can flow through rock
To emphasize the large amount of empty space in all rock
To point out that a rock cannot be both porous and permeable
To distinguish between two related properties of rock
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Surface tension is not strong enough to retain drops of water in rocks with large pores but it strong enough to hold on to thin films of water in rocks with small pores.
Water in rocks is held in place by large pores and drains away from small size pores through surface tension.
Small pores and large pores both interact with surface tension to determine whether a rock will hold water as heavy drops or as a thin film.
If the force of surface tension is too weak to hold water in place as heavy drops, the water will continue to be held firmly in place as a thin film when large pores exist.

In seeking to describe the origins of theater, one must rely primarily on speculation, since there is little concrete evidence on which to draw. The most widely accepted theory, championed by anthropologists in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, envisions theater as emerging out of myth and ritual. The process perceived by these anthropologists may be summarized briefly. During the early stages of its development, a society becomes aware of forces that appear to influence or control its food supply and well-being. Having little understanding of natural causes, it attributes both desirable and undesirable occurrences to supernatural or magical forces, and it searches for means to win the favor of these forces. Perceiving an apparent connection between certain actions performed by the group and the result it desires, the group repeats, refines and formalizes those actions into fixed ceremonies, or rituals.
Stories (myths) may then grow up around a ritual. Frequently the myths include representatives of those supernatural forces that the rites celebrate or hope to influence. Performers may wear costumes and masks to represent the mythical characters or supernatural forces in the rituals or in accompanying celebrations. As a people becomes more sophisticated, its conceptions of supernatural forces and causal relationships may change. As a result, it may abandon or modify some rites. But the myths that have grown up around the rites may continue as part of the groups oral tradition and may even come to be acted out under conditions divorced from these rites. When this occurs, the first step has been taken toward theater as an autonomous activity, and thereafter entertainment and aesthetic values may gradually replace the former mystical and socially efficacious concerns.
 
 Although origin in ritual has long been the most popular, it is by no means the only theory about how the theater came into being. 
  Storytelling has been proposed as one alternative.  Under this theory, relating and listening to stories are seen as fundamental human pleasures.  Thus, the recalling of an event (a hunt, battle, or other feat) is elaborated through the narrators pantomime and impersonation and eventually through each role being assumed by a different person.

A closely related theory sees theater as evolving out of dances that are primarily pantomimic, rhythmical or gymnastic, or from imitations of animal noises and sounds. Admiration for the performers skill, virtuosity, and grace are seen as motivation for elaborating the activities into fully realized theatrical performances.
In addition to exploring the possible antecedents of theater, scholars have also theorized about the motives that led people to develop theater. Why did theater develop, and why was it valued after it ceased to fulfill the function of ritual? Most answers fall back on the theories about the human mind and basic human needs. One, set forth by Aristotle in the fourth century B.C., sees humans as naturally imitativeas taking pleasure in imitating persons, things, and actions and in seeing such imitations. Another, advanced in the twentieth century, suggests that humans have a gift for fantasy, through which they seek to reshape reality into more satisfying forms than those encountered in daily life. Thus, fantasy or fiction (of which drama is one form) permits people to objectify their anxieties and fears, confront them, and fulfill their hopes in fiction if not fact. The theater, then, is one tool whereby people define and understand their world or escape from unpleasant realities.
But neither the human imitative instinct nor a penchant for fantasy by itself leads to an autonomous theater. Therefore, additional explanations are needed. One necessary condition seems to be a somewhat detached view of human problems. For example, one sign of this condition is the appearance of the comic vision, since comedy requires sufficient detachment to view some deviations from social norms as ridiculous rather than as serious threats to the welfare of the entire group. Another condition that contributes to the development of autonomous theater is the emergence of the aesthetic sense. For example, some early societies ceased to consider certain rites essential to their well-being and abandoned them, nevertheless, they retained as parts of their oral tradition the myths that had grown up around the rites and admired them for their artistic qualities rather than for their religious usefulness.
 
The word championed in the passage is closest in meaning to
changed
debated
created
supported
The word attributes in the passage is closest in meaning to
ascribes
leaves
limits
contrasts
According to paragraph 1, theories of the origins of theater
are mainly hypothetical
are well supported by factual evidence
have rarely been agreed upon by anthropologists
were expressed in the early stages of theaters development
According to paragraph 1, why did some societies develop and repeat ceremonial actions?
To establish a positive connection between the members of the society
To help society members better understand the forces controlling their food supply
To distinguish their beliefs from those of other societies
To increase the societys prosperity
The word this in the passage refers to
the acting out of rites
the divorce of ritual performers from the rest of society
the separation of myths from rites
the celebration of supernatural forces
The word autonomous in the passage is closest in meaning to
artistic
important
independent
established
According to paragraph 2, what may cause societies to abandon certain rites?
Emphasizing theater as entertainment
Developing a new understanding of why events occur
Finding a more sophisticated way of representing mythical characters
Moving from a primarily oral tradition to a more written tradition
All of following are mentioned in paragraph 5 as possible reasons that led societies to develop theater EXCEPT
Theater allows people to face that they are afraid of.
Theater gives an opportunity to imagine a better reality.
Theater is a way to enjoy imitating other people.
Theater provides people the opportunity to better understand the human mind.
Which of the following best describes the organization of paragraph 5?
The author presents two theories for a historical phenomenon.
The author argues against theories expressed earlier in the passage.
The author argues for replacing older theories with a new one.
The author points out problems with two popular theories.
The word penchant in the passage is closest in meaning to
compromise
inclination
tradition
respect
Why does the author mention comedy?
To give an example of early types of theater
To explain how theater helps a society respond to threats to its welfare
To help explain why detachment is needed for the development of theater
To show how theatrical performers become detached from other members of society
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
A societys rites were more likely to be retained in the oral tradition if its myths were admired for artistic qualities.
The artistic quality of a myth was sometimes an essential reason for a society to abandon it from the oral tradition.
Some early societies stopped using myths in their religious practices when rites ceased to be seen as useful for social well-being.
Myths sometimes survived in a societys tradition because of their artistic qualities even after they were no longer deemed religiously beneficial.

The transition from forest to treeless tundra on a mountain slope is often a dramatic one. Within a vertical distance of just a few tens of meters, trees disappear as a life-form and are replaced by low shrubs, herbs, and grasses. This rapid zone of transition is called the upper timberline or tree line. In many semiarid areas there is also a lower timberline where the forest passes into steppe or desert at its lower edge, usually because of a lack of moisture.
The upper timberline, like the snow line, is highest in the tropics and lowest in the Polar Regions. It ranges from sea level in the Polar Regions to 4,500 meters in the dry subtropics and 3,500-4,500 meters in the moist tropics. Timberline trees are normally evergreens, suggesting that these have some advantage over deciduous trees (those that lose their leaves) in the extreme environments of the upper timberline. There are some areas, however, where broadleaf deciduous trees form the timberline. Species of birch, for example, may occur at the timberline in parts of the Himalayas.
At the upper timberline the trees begin to become twisted and deformed. This is particularly true for trees in the middle and upper latitudes, which tend to attain greater heights on ridges, whereas in the tropics the trees reach their greater heights in the valleys. This is because middle- and upper- latitude timberlines are strongly influenced by the duration and depth of the snow cover. As the snow is deeper and lasts longer in the valleys, trees tend to attain greater heights on the ridges, even though they are more exposed to high-velocity winds and poor, thin soils there. In the tropics, the valleys appear to be more favorable because they are less prone to dry out, they have less frost, and they have deeper soils.
There is still no universally agreed-on explanation for why there should be such a dramatic cessation of tree growth at the upper timberline. Various environmental factors may play a role. Too much snow, for example, can smother trees, and avalanches and snow creep can damage or destroy them. Late-lying snow reduces the effective growing season to the point where seedlings cannot establish themselves. Wind velocity also increases with altitude and may cause serious stress for trees, as is made evident by the deformed shapes at high altitudes. Some scientists have proposed that the presence of increasing levels of ultraviolet light with elevation may play a role, while browsing and grazing animals like the ibex may be another contributing factor. Probably the most important environmental factor is temperature, for if the growing season is too short and temperatures are too low, tree shoots and buds cannot mature sufficiently to survive the winter months.
 
Above the tree line there is a zone that is generally called alpine tundra.  Immediately adjacent to the timberline, the tundra consists of a fairly complete cover of low-lying shrubs, herbs, 
and grasses, while higher up the number and diversity of species decrease until there is much bare ground with occasional mosses and lichens and some prostrate cushion plants.  Some plants can even survive in favorable microhabitats above the snow line. 
The highest plants in the world occur at around 6,100 meters on Makalu in the Himalayas.  At this great height, rocks, warmed by the sun, melt small snowdrifts.  

The most striking characteristic of the plants of the alpine zone is their low growth form. This enables them to avoid the worst rigors of high winds and permits them to make use of the higher temperatures immediately adjacent to the ground surface. In an area where low temperatures are limiting to life, the importance of the additional heat near the surface is crucial. The low growth form can also permit the plants to take advantage of the insulation provided by a winter snow cover. In the equatorial mountains the low growth form is less prevalent.
 
The word dramatic in the passage is closest in meaning to
gradual
complex
visible
striking
Where is the lower timberline mentioned in paragraph 1 likely to be found?
In an area that has little water
In an area that has little sunlight
Above a transition area
On a mountain that has on upper timberline.
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 1 about both the upper and lower timberlines?
Both are treeless zones.
Both mark forest boundaries.
Both are surrounded by desert areas.
Both suffer from a lack of moisture.
Paragraph 2 supports which of the following statements about deciduous trees?
They cannot grow in cold climates.
They do not exist at the upper timberline.
They are less likely than evergreens to survive at the upper timberline.
They do not require as much moisture as evergreens do.
The word attain in the passage is closest in meaning to
require
resist
achieve
endure
The word they in the passage refers to
valleys
trees
heights
ridges
The word prone in the passage is closest in meaning to
adapted
likely
difficult
resistant
According to paragraph 3, which of the following is true of trees in the middle and upper latitudes?
Tree growth is negatively affected by the snow cover in valleys
Tree growth is greater in valleys than on ridges.
Tree growth on ridges is not affected by high-velocity winds.
Tree growth lasts longer in those latitudes than it does in the tropics.
Which of the sentences below best express the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? In correct choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Because of their deformed shapes at high altitudes, trees are not likely to be seriously harmed by the strong winds typical of those altitudes.
As altitude increases, the velocity of winds increase, leading to a serious decrease in the number of trees found at high altitudes.
The deformed shapes of trees at high altitudes show that wind velocity, which increase with altitude, can cause serious hardship for trees.
Increased wind velocity at high altitudes deforms the shapes of trees, and this may cause serious stress for trees.
In paragraph 4, what is the authors main purpose in the discussion of the dramatic cessation of tree growth at the upper timberline?
To argue that none of several environment factors that are believed to contribute to that phenomenon do in fact play a role in causing it.
To argue in support of one particular explanation of that phenomenon against several competing explanations
To explain why the primary environmental factor responsible for that phenomenon has not yet been identified
To present several environmental factors that may contribute to a satisfactory explanation of that phenomenon
The word prevalent in the passage is closest in meaning to
predictable
widespread
successful
developed
According to paragraph 6, all of the following statements are true of plants in the alpine zone EXCEPT:
Because they are low, they are less exposed to strong winds.
Because they are low, the winter snow cover gives them more protection from the extreme cold.
In the equatorial mountains, they tend to be lower than in mountains elsewhere.
Their low growth form keeps them closer to the ground, where there is more heat than further up.

 It is thought that the facial pits or pit organs on the head of some snakes are specialized infrared (heat) receptors.  When a rattlesnake strikes, the direction of the strike seems to be guided by the infrared radiation from its prey.  A rattlesnake strikes only at warm-blooded prey, and when the prey is dead and at room temperature, the snake will not strike.  However, a blindfolded snake strikes correctly at a dead rat that is pulled across the cage, provided the rat is warmer than the surroundings. Blindfolded, the snake cannot be guided by vision; nor is it guided by the sense of smell, for it will strike correctly even at a moving, cloth-wrapped electric bulb. The pit organs are evidently involved in sensing the location of warm objects. All snakes that have pit organs feed preferentially on warm-blooded prey, and this further supports the view that these organs are infrared sensors. In the rattlesnake the pit organs are located, one on each side, between the nostril and the eye; they are connected to many nerves, and this in itself suggests a sensory role for the organ.
The sensitivity of the facial pit has been examined by recording the activity in the nerve leading from the organ. A variety of stimuli, such as sound, vibration, or light of moderate intensity (with the infrared part of the spectrum filtered out), has no detectable effect on the activity in the nerve. However, if objects of a temperature different from the surroundings are brought into the receptive field around the head, there is a striking change in nerve activity, regardless of the temperature of the intervening air.
How is the infrared radiation sensed? The pit is covered by a thin transparent membrane, and it has been suggested that a rise in temperature in the pit behind the membrane could cause an expansion of the gas with a consequent deformation of the membrane. This in turn could be sensed by a suitable receptor. This hypothesis is highly improbable, for a cut in the membrane that opens the pit to the outside air causes no loss in responsiveness, a result that is incompatible with the hypothesis that a pressure change is sensed.
We are left with two other possibilities to consider: Either the effect is photochemical, which means that the infrared radiation is absorbed by a specific compound, analogous to the light-sensitive pigments in the eye, or the pit organs are sensitive to the slight temperature rise caused when infrared radiation reaches it. The infrared radiation emitted from a mammalian body has low quantum energy, which makes any photochemical effect on a pigment extremely unlikely. Pure infrared radiation can be produced by a laser, and experiments with such radiation of known wavelength provide strong evidence that the mode of reception in the facial pit organ is entirely thermal.
Can the pit organs be used for perception of the infrared source in the way our two eyes are used for stereoscopic vision? This seems likely, not only from observations of the precision with which a snake can strike, but also from studies of its brain activity. When infrared radiation falls on the facial pit organ, electric activity can be recorded from the optic tectum, the part of the brain with which the optic nerve is connected. This in itself is suggestive; although the nerves from the pit organ are completely separate from the optic nerves, the same part of the brain seems to handle visual information, which is known to be stereoscopic, and infrared information. The optic tectum has left and right parts, located on either side of the brain. Each part receives input from each eye via the optic chiasma, the point at which the optic nerves from the left and right eye meet. Many of the neurons in the tectum respond to stimulation of the pit organ on the opposite side of the head. This is reminiscent of the way information from the eyes is handled; the crossover of the optic nerve in the optic chiasma is essential for stereoscopic vision and interpretation of distance.Information from the two pit organs is apparently coordinated and interpreted in a similar way, a conclusion in agreement with recorded changes in the neural activity in the tectum when the infrared source is in a position to irradiate both pits at once. It therefore appears that the facial pits indeed provide stereoscopic perception and substantially aid in the precision of estimating the location of prey.
 
According to paragraph 1, a rattlesnake will only strike at prey when
the snake is able to see the prey
the prey emits chemical odors
the prey is moving
the prey is warmer than its surroundings
Why does the author mention a cloth-wrapped electric bulb in the passage?
To illustrate the size of prey usually attacked by snakes
To prove that blindfolded snakes will strike more often at a dead rat than an electric bulb
To eliminate the possibility that snakes locate prey by using a sense of smell
To explain how scientists were able to trick blindfolded snakes
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
However, if objects in the surrounding area experience a temperature change, nerve activity causes a change in temperature in the receptive field around the snakes head.
When objects that differ in temperature from the surroundings enter the receptive field around the head, the result is a dramatic change in nerve activity.
Nerve activity changes when new objects are introduced into the area around a snakes head, regardless of how their temperature compares to that of the surrounding air.
The temperature of the air in the receptive field around the snakes head has an effect on the nerve activity of the snake if the objects in the field are at a different temperature.
The word consequent in the passage is closest in meaning to
resultant
eventual
premature
visible
Which of the following can be inferred from the discussion about infrared sensation and pit organs in paragraph 3?
Rattlesnakes have special receptors that detect pressure changes in the pit organ membrane.
Damaged pit organ membranes do not prevent a rattlesnake from detecting a warm animal nearby.
The experiments on pit organ membranes were conducted in a chamber with air at outside temperatures.
The idea that pit organs help snakes to locate prey by radiation has been disproved.
According to paragraph 4, which of the following tends to exclude a photochemical explanation for the sensory function of snake pit organs?
Only lasers can produce the exact wavelengths of radiation that have an effect on pit organs.
Light-sensitive pigments are located in the eyes but not in the pit organs of snakes.
Compounds sensitive to infrared radiation have not yet been identified in snake pit organs.
The infrared radiation from a snakes prey has too little energy to affect the snakes pigments.
The word substantially in the passage is closest in meaning to
reliably
undoubtedly
frequently
significantly
According to paragraph 5, all of the following support the idea that a snake uses its pit organs for stereoscopic perception EXCEPT the fact that
stimulation of a pit organ has an effect on the tectum on the opposite side of the brain
the same part of the brain that deals with stereoscopic vision is activated by infrared stimulation of the pit organs
the nerves of the right eye and the right pit organ are completely separate from the nerves of the left eye and the left pit organ
a snake is able to strike its prey with precision

The idea of natural selection is that organisms in a species that have characteristics favoring survival are most likely to survive and produce offspring with the same characteristics. Because the survival of organisms with particular characteristics is favored over the survival of other organisms in the same species that lack these characteristics, future generations of the species are likely to include more organisms with the favorable characteristics.
One of the most thoroughly analyzed examples of natural selection in operation is the change in color that has occurred in certain populations of the peppered moth, Biston betularia, in industrial regions of Europe during the past 100 years. Originally moths were uniformly pale gray or whitish in color; dark-colored (melanic) individuals were rare and made up less than 2 percent of the population. Over a period of decades, dark-colored forms became an increasingly large fraction of some populations and eventually came to dominate peppered moth populations in certain areas especially those of extreme industrialization such as the Ruhr Valley of Germany and the Midlands of England. Coal from industry released large amounts of black soot into the environment, but the increase of the dark-colored forms was not due to genetic mutations caused by industrial pollution. For example, caterpillars that feed on soot-covered leaves did not give rise to dark- colored adults. Rather, pollution promoted the survival of dark forms on soot-covered trees. Melanics were normally quickly eliminated in nonindustrial areas by adverse selection; birds spotted them easily. This phenomenon, an increase in the frequency of dark-colored mutants in polluted areas, is known as industrial melanism. The North American equivalent of this story is another moth, the swettaria form of Biston cognataria, first noticed in industrialized areas such as Chicago and New York City in the early 1900s. By 1961 it constituted over 90 percent of the population in parts of Michigan.
The idea that natural selection was responsible for the changing ratio of dark- to light-colored peppered moths was developed in the 1950s by H. B. D. Kettlewell of Oxford University. If natural selection was the explanation, then there should be different survival rates for dark- and light- colored moths.  To determine whether this was true, Kettlewell released thousands of light and dark moths (each marked with a paint spot) into rural and industrialized areas.  In the nonindustrial area of Dorset, he recaptured 14.6 percent of the pale forms but only 4.7 percent of the dark forms.  In the industrial area of Birmingham, the situation was reversed: 13 percent of pale forms but 27.5 percent of dark forms were recaptured.  
Clearly some environmental factor was responsible for the greater survival rates of dark moths. Birds were predators of peppered moths. Kettlewell hypothesized that the normal pale forms are difficult to see when resting on lichen-covered trees, whereas dark forms are conspicuous. In industrialized areas, lichens are destroyed by pollution, tree barks become darker, and dark moths are the ones birds have difficulty detecting. As a test, Kettlewell set up hidden observation positions and watched birds voraciously eat moths placed |on tree trunks of a contrasting color. The action of natural selection in producing a small but highly significant step of evolution was seemingly demonstrated, with birds as the selecting force.
Not every researcher has been convinced that natural selection by birds is the only explanation of the observed frequencies of dark and light peppered moths. More recent data, however, provide additional support for Kettleweir's ideas about natural selection. The light-colored form of the peppered moth is making a strong comeback. In Britain, a Clean Air Act was passed in 1965. Sir Cyril Clarke has been trapping moths at his home in Liverpool, Merseyside, since 1959. Before about 1975, 90 percent of the moths were dark, but since then there has been a steep decline in melanic forms, and in 1989 only 29.6 percent of the moths caught were melanic. The mean concentration of sulphur dioxide pollution fell from about 300 micrograms per cubic meter in 1970 to less than 50 micrograms per cubic meter in 1975 and has remained fairly constant since then.  If the spread of the light-colored form of the moth continues at the same speed as the melanic form spread .in the last century, soon the melanic form will again be only an occasional resident of the Liverpool area.
 
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Peppered moth populations gradually increased in size, with dark-colored moths increasing their numbers fastest in the industrialized areas of Germany and England.
Over a period of decades, dark-colored peppered moths came to certain areas of the Ruhr Valley and the Midlands and became the dominant forms there.
In Germany and England, dark-colored peppered moths forced most light-colored moths out of their territories.
While they also increased elsewhere, dark-colored peppered moths gradually became the dominant form in areas of extreme industrialization.
In the passage, why does the author mention that "the increase of the dark-colored forms was not due to genetic mutations caused by industrial pollution"?
To suggest that the rate of genetic change in peppered moths actually decreased.
To emphasize that pollution in industrial areas had no role in the increase of dark peppered moths.
To introduce the information about the soot-covered trees that caterpillars fed on as the correct explanation for the increase in dark peppered moths.
To reject a view of the role of pollution in the increase of dark peppered moths that would not involve natural selection.
The phrase "give rise to" in the passage is closest in meaning to
live longer than
associate with
produce
compete with
The passage suggests which of the following about "the swettaria form of Biston cognataria"?
It was a dark-colored moth form.
It is now extinct in industrialized areas.
It did not exist before the early 1900s.
It came to North America from Europe.
Paragraph 3 answers all of the following questions about Kettlewell's experiment EXCEPT:
How was it determined whether a recaptured moth was one of those that Kettlewell released?
Were equal numbers of dark-and light-colored moths released?
What hypothesis was Kettlewell trying to test with the experiment?
What were the results of the experiment?
The word "conspicuous" in the passage is closest in meaning to
easily eaten
clearly visible
poorly adapted
rarely present
Paragraph 4 suggests which of the following about the survival of peppered moths?
Light forms of the moth are more likely to survive in polluted rather than unpolluted areas.
Birds are more likely to determine the survival rates of moths in rural rather than industrial areas.
Environment determines whether dark or light forms of the moth survive.
The presence of lichen on tree trunks encourages birds to prey on both dark and light forms of the moth with the same frequency.
The word "detecting" in the passage is closest in meaning to
discovering
capturing
eating
hiding
The word "convinced" in the passage is closest in meaning to
persuaded
concerned
informed
pleased
What is the purpose of paragraph 5 in the passage?
To explain why Kettlewell's view has been widely misunderstood.
To present a view that various researchers have criticized.
To suggest why new developments seem to confirm Kettlewell's view.
To state one of the proposed alternatives to Kettlewell's view.
According to paragraph 5, which of the following is true of melanic forms in Liverpool?
Increased sulphur dioxide pollution decreased their numbers after 1975.
Their population slowly increased from 1975 to 1989.
From 1950 on, they have seldom been seen in the Liverpool area.
Before 1975 their population was higher than that of light-colored moths.
In paragraph 5 the change in the frequency of melanic forms is attributed to which of the following?
New kinds of pollution in Liverpool
The passage of the Clean Air Act in 1965
Changes in rates of genetic mutation
Changes in populations of moth predators

In the field of chemistry, the understanding of the word air has undergone radical change. Air for John Mayow, a seventeenth-century chemist, was essentially a receptacle for airborne particles, and through them manifested a variety of chemical properties.  But although Mayow and a few other chemists did detect specific chemical properties in what we call gases (including our carbon dioxide), most chemists left them unaccounted for until the beginning of the eighteenth century.  As chemists became aware that the atmosphere itself (and not just particles within it) had a role to play in combustion, respiration, and other reactions, they did not attribute this to the chemical properties of air but rather to substances that air could absorb and release according to circumstances.  Thus, air provided a physical environment in which some reactions took place.
 In the early 1700s, the air was widely seen as just such an environment, and air and the air were one and the same thing. Chemists were not in the habit of regarding airs or gases as having different chemical properties. There was simply air. One obvious reason for this was practical. Chemists could examine solids and liquids, exposing them to a variety of tests and seeing how they contributed to assorted reactions. Chemists had, however, no comparable way of examining air; and they came to view chemistry as the sum total of the reactions of solids and liquids, excluding gases. Chemists stressed chemical qualities over physical properties like weight and let physicists deal with air. Chemists generally did not examine air, and they did not try to weigh it. That does not mean that chemists did not weigh substances. They did a lot of weighing, and pharmacists and metallurgists did more. But weighing gases was outside their brief. In the Encyclopedia of Diderot and d'Alembert, published between 1751 and 1775, readers were told that the incoercibility of gases will remove them from our researches for a long time to come.
By the time of the Encyclopedia, however, this had begun to change. One of the first and key sources of change was the invention by the Reverend Stephen Hales of a new instrument, the pneumatic trough. This instrument is important for what it made possible in the handling of air. The history of its invention and early use illustrates the difference there may be between the motives for inventing a device and the ways in which that device is used.
Hales was a botanist and chemist as well as a physiologist. He wrote a book in 1727 investigating mechanical subjects like the pressure of sap in plants. But Hales went further, addressing chemical as well as physiological questions. He urged chemists to consider air chemically. He described an instrument for washing the air produced in the course of a chemical reaction. He wanted to get rid of impurities in the air by letting it pass through water. Air passed from a reaction vessel through water in a trough (or tube) and then into a second vessel that was partly filled with water and that could capture air.
In devising this apparatus, Hales had coincidentally furnished an instrument for catching and holding air, which could then be subjected to various tests. Used in this way, the apparatus became known as the pneumatic trough. Half a century after its invention, it became a staple of the chemical laboratory. It also became one of the key instruments in the reform of chemistry that we know as the chemical revolution because it was essential to incorporating a whole new state of matter, the gaseous state, into chemistry, alongside the already studied solid and liquid states. Once that step had been taken, it was possible to speculate and then to demonstrate that the gaseous state, like the solid and liquid states, could contain a variety of chemical substances. This was an enormous step, and it did not happen overnight. Hales had shown that air could be contained, washed, and purified, and tested chemically as well as physically. This, however, did not lead him to think that there was more than one kind of air. Air for him remained air, not one of a number of airs. Other chemists would take that essential step.
 
According to paragraph 1, John Mayow believed which of the following about air?
Air was not involved in chemical reactions such as combustion and respiration.
The absorption and release of substances in the air depended on the gases in the atmosphere.
Carbon dioxide was the most important component of air and allowed chemical reactions to take place.
The air had no chemical properties but contained particles that did.
What is the main point of paragraph 2?
Diderot and d'Alembert were the first to recognize that gases were a third state of matter.
Advances in pharmacy and metallurgy led to a better understanding of gases.
Early chemists had no tools for investigating the chemical properties of gases.
By performing various tests on solids and liquids, chemists were able to better understand gases.
The word comparable in the passage is closest in meaning to
effective
equivalent
reliable
easy
The author includes the quotation from the Encyclopedia of Diderot and d'Alembert in order to
support the argument that pharmacists and metallurgists were better at studying gases than chemists were
emphasize that chemists did not consider gases to be a subject for their study
suggest that physicists were no more concerned with gases than chemists were
argue that Diderot and d'Alembert deliberately limited the amount of research done on gases
According to paragraph 4, Hales made an important contribution to chemistry by proposing that chemists do which of the following?
Consider mechanical subjects as well as chemical ones
Use cleaner air in their experiments
Provide detailed descriptions of the devices they used
Think about air in chemical terms
The word staple in the passage is closest in meaning to
regular feature
effective tool
new device
distinct advantage
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Because of Hales' apparatus, the study of the gaseous state of matter played just as important a role in the chemical revolution as the study of the solid and liquid states did.
It was essential for chemists to devise new instruments such as Hales apparatus in order to study different states of matter alongside one another.
Hales apparatus helped revolutionize the field of chemistry by making it possible for chemists to study a third state of matter the gaseous state.
Hales apparatus was a key development in the chemical revolution because it allowed scientists to transform gaseous matter into different states of matter.
According to paragraph 5, Hales did not understand that air can
take various chemical forms
be washed and purified
be tested chemically as well as physically
be contained for experimentation purposes

Geographical constraints have had important consequences for the economy and society of Iran. Where rainfall is adequate, there are fertile valleys and grasslands suitable for grazing animals. However, since the natural vegetation tends to be sparse, it is difficult for such animals to remain in one place for any length of time. Thus nomadic pastoralismkeeping livestock (such as sheep and goats) by wandering from place to placewas one of the first and most persistent human economic activities to flourish in this area. This nomadic movement was often of the vertical variety, with people and animals moving from lowlands in wintertime to highlands in summer. The animals raised by the pastoralists provided not only food but also material for crafts such as the making of carpets, thick felt cloth, and tents. The pastoralists were typically organized into large tribal confederations capable of controlling the vast territories needed for maintaining their herds.
The tribes were a powerful social and political factor throughout Iranian history. The skills necessary for herding animals, hunting and chasing off predators, directing migrations, disciplining tribesmen, and protecting lands and animals from rivals could be easily adapted and directed toward military purposes as well. It was typically the tribes that produced the soldiers and rulers of the country and provided the power base for most of its dynasties. Once established, governments needed to cultivate the support of friendly tribal groups and tried to control hostile tribes by combat, deportation, or forcible settlement. At the beginning of the twentieth century, approximately one-fourth of the population were tribal peoples, and they were a potent force in Iranian affairs. With the advent of mechanized armies in the 1930s, however, there were systematic efforts to break the power of the tribes and to coerce the tribal population into a sedentary way of life. These efforts have been largely successful, and the tribes are no longer so significant a force in either the Iranian economy or society. Less than 5 percent of the population now consists of nomadic pastoralists.
The aridity of the Iranian plateau retarded its agricultural development in comparison to adjacent regions such as Mesopotamia, which had great rivers to draw upon for a supply of water. Eventually, at some uncertain date probably about 26 centuries ago, there was a technological breakthrough that made it possible to farm crops outside the few oases, streams, and other places with sufficient rainfall for agriculture. This was the development of underground canals known as qanats. The qanat system took advantage of the natural slope (inclination) of the plateau basins. A well would be dug in the foothills to reach a water source, usually water from melting snow that had seeped underground. Then a sequence of wells and shafts connected by underground canals would be constructed to transport the water to an area suitable for cultivation, where it could support the needs of one or more villages. The slope of the underground canals had to be controlled carefully to prevent erosion, and the interior surface of wells and shafts needed to be kept under constant maintenance to prevent them from collapsing.
 Since the canals were underground, loss from evaporation was minimized.  Gravity provided the means of moving the water, so no mechanical energy was required to operate the system.  The numerous wells and shafts kept the length of the tricky underground canal short and facilitated repairs of each segment.  Built up over the centuries, the system eventually became immense. It has been estimated that the total length of the qanat system today, counting wells, shafts, and canals, is in excess of 300,000 kilometers (almost the distance from Earth to the Moon!), which gives some idea of the tremendous investment in money and labor power it represents. Yet the type of agriculture that developed around the qanat system gave modest yields and required hard work from the peasant farmers, who received only a small share of the agricultural produce.
 
According to paragraph 1, pastoralists in Iran needed to move their animals for which of the following reasons?
Their herds were constantly growing in size.
Much of the land was too steep to be used by all the grazing animals at once.
In any given place, the animals soon ran out of food.
Many fertile valleys and grasslands could be reached only at certain times of the year.
According to paragraph 2, nomadic pastoralists were important in Iranian history for all of the following reasons EXCEPT
They produced rulers for Iran.
They formed a significant proportion of the Iranian population.
They used the skills developed for nomadic pastoralism to support ruling dynasties.
They helped make the transition in Iran from traditional to mechanized armies.
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 2 about the relationship between Iranian governments and the nomadic tribes?
Governments used soldiers from friendly tribes to combat tribes opposed to the government.
Governments tried to increase the military power of the tribes.
Governments used the pastoral skills of tribesmen to benefit the governments economic interests.
Governments encouraged fighting amongst the tribes in order to limit tribal power.
The word breakthrough in the passage is closest in meaning to
experiment
opportunity
advance
method
According to paragraph 3, why was it necessary to regularly inspect the qanat system?
Erosion might cause the canals to slope.
Runoff from melting snow could sometimes cause flooding.
Wells and shafts might collapse if not kept in good repair.
Water from the system was not always distributed fairly among villages.
According to paragraph 4, why was the qanat system built with numerous wells and shafts?
To minimize water loss
To keep individual segments of the qanat canals short for easy maintenance
To avoid the need to supply energy to transport water through the qanat canals
To provide sufficient means for removing the water for irrigation
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
The qanat system today is thought to be in excess of 300,000 kilometers, which is almost as great as the distance between Earth and the Moon.
Counting all of the wells, shafts, and canals would be both difficult and expensive, so the total length of the qanat system has been estimated rather than measured.
The effort and expense required to build the qanat system is apparent from its estimated length of more than 300,000 kilometers.
The investment of money and labor needed to construct the qanat system was probably almost as great as that required to travel from Earth to the Moon.
In paragraph 3, why does the author compare the agricultural development of the Iranian plateau with that of adjacent regions?
To explain how rivers affect agricultural development
To explain why adjacent regions did not develop a qanat system
To provide the motivation for the development of the qanat system in Iran
To imply that in both the Iranian plateau and Mesopotamia, agriculture depended on irrigation

Because they have had some practice in hearing before birth, it is not surprising that infants have reasonably good auditory perception after they are born. In fact, for certain very high and very low frequencies, infants actually are more sensitive to sound than adultsa sensitivity that seems to increase during the first two years of life. On the other hand, infants are initially less sensitive than adults to middle-range frequencies. Eventually, however, their capabilities within the middle range improve.
It is not fully clear what leads to the improvement during infancy in sensitivity to sounds, although it may be related to the maturation of the nervous system. More puzzling is why, after infancy, childrens ability to hear very high and low frequencies gradually declines. One explanation may be that exposure to high levels of noise may diminish capacities at the extreme ranges. 
In addition to the ability to detect sound, infants need several other abilities in order to hear effectively. For instance, sound localization permits infants to pinpoint the direction from which a sound is emanating. Compared to adults, infants have a slight handicap in this task, because effective sound localization requires the use of the slight difference in the times at which a sound reaches our two ears. Because infants heads are smaller than those of adults, the difference in timing of the arrival of sound at the two ears is less than it is in adults. However, despite the potential limitation brought about by their smaller heads, infants sound localization abilities are actually fairly good even at birth, and they reach adult levels of success by the age of one year. Interestingly, their improvement is not steady: although we dont know why, the accuracy of sound localization actually declines between birth and two months of age, but then begins to increase.
Even more important to their ultimate success in the world, young infants are capable of making the fine discriminations that their future understanding of language will require. For instance, in one classic study, a group of one- to four-month-old infants sucked on nipples that activated a recording of a person saying ba every time they sucked. At first, their interest in the sound made them suck vigorously. Soon, though, they became acclimated to the sound and sucked with less energy. On the other hand, when the experimenters changed the sound to pa, the infants immediately showed new interest and sucked with greater vigor once again. The clear conclusion: infants as young as one month old could make the distinction between the two similar sounds.
Even more intriguing is the fact that young infants are able to discriminate certain characteristics that differentiate one language from another. Some evidence suggests that even two day olds show preferences for the language spoken by those around them over other languages. In the first few months, the ability to discriminate between languages develops rapidly. By the age of five months, they can distinguish the difference between English and Spanish passages, even when the two are similar in meter, number of syllables, and speed of recitation.
Given their ability to discriminate a difference in speech as slight as the difference between two consonants, it is not surprising that infants can distinguish different people on the basis of voice. In fact, from an early age they show clear preferences for some voices over others. For instance, in one experiment newborns were allowed to suck a nipple that turned on a recording of a human voice reading a story. The infants sucked significantly longer when the voice was that of their mother than when the voice was that of a stranger.
How do such preferences arise? One hypothesis is that prenatal exposure to the mothers voice is the key. As support for this conjecture, researchers point to the fact that newborns do not show a preference for their fathers voices over other male voices. Furthermore, newborns prefer listening to melodies sung by their mothers before they were born to melodies that were not sung before birth. It seems, then, that the prenatal exposure to their mothers voicesalthough muffled by the liquid environment of the wombhelps shape infants listening preferences.
 
The word initiallyin the passage is closest in meaning to
usually
at first
to some extent
basically
According to paragraph 1, which of the following statements does NOT accurately characterize auditory capability in infants?
Infants have good auditory capabilities in extreme frequencies rather than in middle frequencies.
Infants have no experience with auditory stimuli before they are born.
Infants are more capable of hearing high and low frequencies than adults are, and this capability increases during the first two years of life.
An infants sensitivity to frequencies in the middle range improves as the infant grows older.
Which of the following best describes the organization of paragraph 2?
A brief discussion of two changes in auditory perception together with possible explanations of them
Two hypotheses about auditory perception, followed by summaries of experiments that have tested those hypotheses
A brief history of studies of auditory perception, followed by a discussion of two recent studies
A comparison of two different answers to an important question in the study of auditory perception
According to paragraph 3, which of the following statements does NOT accurately characterize infantssound-localization capabilities?
The sound-localization capabilities of infants do not improve steadily, but the reason for this is unknown.
Infants ability to localize sound declines steadily after two months of age, but then increases after the age of one.
The comparatively short distance between the ears of infants makes their sound localization potentially less exact than that of adults.
By the age of one year, infants sound-localization capabilities are similar to those of adults.
Which of the following statements describes a finding from the classic study on infantsauditory perception that is discussed in paragraph 4?
Infants are more interested in sounds of spoken language than they are in other kinds of sounds.
Infants show more interest in some consonant sounds than others.
When the sound infants are hearing is changed, the infants lose interest.
Even very young infants are able to notice slight differences in sound.
The classic study discussed in paragraph 4 supports which of the following claims?
The infants sucking responses would have been different if a different pair of consonants had been used.
The infants in the study had previous exposure to a language in which the difference between ba and pa is important.
Infants are more interested in what is new or unexpected than they are in any particular consonant sound.
Infants are able to produce the distinct consonant sounds that they hear as distinct.
What is the main point of paragraph 5?
Very young children can distinguish between the sounds of different languages even though they cannot speak.
Many children are exposed at an early age to both English and Spanish.
Meter and speed of recitation are two characteristics children use to distinguish one language from another.
Children recognize similar sounding words in different languages.
Why does the author discuss the voices of fathers and other males in paragraph 7?
To emphasize the difference between the auditory abilities before and after a child is born
To provide evidence that infants' listening preferences are shaped by what they hear in the womb
To argue that very young infants may have difficulty distinguishing between two similar-sounding voices
To argue that infants are less interested in male voices than female voices

Between 9,000 and 4,000 years ago, most of Mexico was inhabited mainly by hunter-foragers who lived in small bands that moved with the seasons to exploit cactus fruits, deer herds, nuts, and the hundreds of other plant and animal species in their range, depending on the season.  Since these bands were small in size and never stayed in one place for a sufficient period of time to have much long-term effect on the plant and animal populations on which they subsisted, the hunter-foragers overall impact on their environment was low.  A few groups along the margins of the lake in the Valley of Mexico may have been sedentary villagers, as were some groups along the coasts, and their role in the domestication of plants and animals and the eventual spread of agriculture is unclear.  Some researchers suggest, however, that by about 4,000 years ago, maize cob size had become large enough that people over large areas of the Mexican highlands could subsist mainly on maize. 
The recent re-dating of some of the supposedly earliest domesticated maize in Mesoamerica (Ancient Mexico) to about 3500 B.C. raises the possibility that initial agriculture evolved out of intensified foraging by groups of people who were relatively sedentary, perhaps living all or most of the year in one or a few places, and that they were perhaps even in the process of developing social differences (social hierarchy) that increased the intensity of their foraging. However maize was domesticated, and by whom, maize appears to have reached sufficient productivity to permit the village-farming way of life soon after about 2000 B.C., and agricultural communities appeared at about this time in many different areas.
From the hot, wet coastal lowlands to the arid Tehuacan Valley, the earliest villages were quite similar in size and contents. Almost all houses were built using the wattle-and-daub methodsticks branches, and cane were woven in-and-out between vertical wall poles, then covered with a mud plaster, which was dried by the hot sun. Houses, which were seldom larger than four by six meters, featured thatched roofs and tamped clay floors on which fine sand was scattered.
Most of the earliest farming communities were tiny hamletsvillages of ten to twelve houses that were home to about fifty to sixty peoplebut some communities were larger. Most houses that have been excavated have yielded the same remains, mainly grinding stones, storage pits, pieces of large ceramic storage jars, bones of cottontail rabbits, carbonized maize fragments, and broken pieces of ceramic charcoal braziers. In addition, ovens, middens, and graves are very common. While the proportion of plant and animal foods varied somewhat, all villages probably grew maize, beans, squash, peppers, and some other crops, and hunted deer and rabbits. Each village, or each extended family, may have had a specialist who did pressure flaking of stone (to make tools), leather-working, or a similar craft, and individual villages may have concentrated on specialties like salt production, feather-weaving, shell-working, and grinding stone manufacture.
As in Mesopotamia, China, and elsewhere, the background to the origins of complex society in Mesoamerica was a great scatter of relatively simple agricultural villages in which the mechanics of producing a reliable, expandable food supply had been mastered. An early radical break with the simple village farming tradition of Mesoamerica occurred in the sweltering lowlands of the South Gulf Coast of Mexico. Here, beginning at about 1000 B.C., people built massive clay pyramids and platforms, lived in small town groups of hundreds or even thousands, intensively farmed a variety of ecological zones, and produced what is one of the worlds most valued examples of stone sculpture.
These people are known to us as the Olmec, a name derived from an ancient American word for rubberdoubtless a reference to the rubber trees that grow in this areabut a name they themselves probably did not use. Some scholars have considered the possibility that the Olmec culture was the mother culture of all later complex societies in Mesoamerica and that the Olmec were directly responsible for transforming their neighbors by military, political, religious, or economic means into complex societies. Other scholars, however, have argued convincingly that the Olmec represent only one of several largely independent cases of the evolution of social complexity in Mesoamerica.
 
According to paragraph 1, which of the following developments occurred in Mexico between 9,000 and 4,000 years ago'?
Sedentary villages gradually disappeared, except along the coast and along lakeshores.
Agriculture spread steadily as more and more plants and animals were domesticated.
Hunter-foragers living on the coasts moved to the highlands.
Maize emerged as the dominant food plant.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
These small bands never stayed in one place long enough to get the most out of the plants and animals on which they lived.
To keep their impact on the environment low, these small bands never stayed anywhere for very long.
These bands were small and moved frequently, so they had relatively little impact on their environment.
Because these bands were small and did not settle anywhere, there is never enough evidence of the effect they had on their environment.
Paragraph 2 supports the idea that the development of social differences would have had which of the following effects?
A quickening of the transition to early agriculture
A slowing down of the change to sedentary life
Less contact among foraging groups
Conflict within foraging groups
Paragraph 3 supports which of the following statements about the earliest houses?
They were adapted to the particular climate in which they were built.
They used a variety of construction methods but not of building materials.
They varied in size according to how many people lived in them.
They did not differ significantly from one another.
According to paragraph 4, the contents of the excavated houses are mainly related to
the making and shipping of tools
the storage and preparation of food
the production of crafts using natural materials like feathers and shells
the trade goods that the village specialized in producing
In paragraph 5, why does the author mention the conditions in which complex society developed in Mesopotamia, China, and elsewhere?
To identify models that guided the author in studying the development of village farming in Mesoamerica
To contrast the sudden emergence of complex societies in Mesoamerica with their very gradual growth in other parts of the world
To emphasize that complex societies emerged in Mesoamerica in the same circumstances as complex societies did elsewhere in the world
To suggest that highly successful food production was limited to a very few places until about 1000 B.C.
The word expandablein the passage is closest in meaning to
capable of being enlarged
easily accessible
highly varied
larger-than-necessary
Which of the following does the author imply in paragraph 6 is the most important scholarly controversy about Olmec society?
What name the Olmec themselves used for their society
How the Olmec managed to remain independent
Whether or not all complex Mexican societies were derived from the Olmec
Whether the Olmec used religion or military power to transform their neighbors

With the emergence of the Sumerian civilization in about 3100 B.C., a new era in human experience began-one in which the economic, political, and social mechanisms created by humans began to affect the lives of cities, towns, and villages located hundreds and perhaps thousands of miles apart. In a real sense, a rapidly evolving world system linked hundreds of Southwest Asian societies all the way from modern-day eastern Iran to the eastern Mediterranean and the Nile Valley. This nascent world system developed as a result of insatiable demands for nonlocal raw materials in different ecological regions where societies were developing along very similar evolutionary tracks toward greater complexity. In each area,social developments and technological innovations were triggered not only by basic economic needs but also by the competitive instincts of newly urbanized elites, who used lavish display and exotic luxuries to reaffirm their social prestige and authority. Sumerian civilization is a mirror of this developing regional interdependence.
Sumerian civilization came into being as a result of a combination of environmental and social factors. The Sumerians lived in a treeless, lowland environment with fertile soils but no metal, little timber, and no semiprecious stones. They obtained these commodities by trading with areas where such items were in abundance. Sumerian rulers controlled not only large grain surpluses that could be moved in river craft but also a flourishing industry in textiles and other luxuries. The trade moved up and down the great rivers,especially the placid Euphrates. Ancient overland trade routes linked the Tigris and Euphrates rivers with the distant cities and ports in the Levant (eastern Mediterranean area). Even as early as Sumerian times, caravans of pack animals joined Anatolia to the Euphrates, the Levant to Mesopotamia, and Mesopotamia to isolated towns on the distant Iranian highlands to the east.
Bronze technology produced tougher-edged, more durable artifacts that could be used for more arduous day-to-day tasks. One resulting innovation was the metal- and wood- tipped plow, an implement dragged by oxen that was capable of digging a far deeper furrow than the simple hoes and digging sticks of earlier times. The plow was developed as irrigation agriculture assumed greater importance in Sumer, and the combined innovations increased agricultural yields dramatically. These yields not only supported larger urban and rural populations but also provided a means for the rulers of city-states both in Sumer and farther afield to exercise more control over food surpluses and over the wealth obtained by long-distance exchange.
An intricate and ever-changing system of political alliances and individual obligations of friendship linked community with community and city-state with city-state. In time, financial and logistical checks and balances were maintained by an administrative system based in the temples to bring order to what had begun as informal bartering. Specialized merchants began to handle such commodities as copper and lapis lazuli, a semiprecious stone. There was wholesaling and contracting, loans were floated, and individual profit was a prime motivation. Increasingly, every city-state, and even entire civilizations, came to depend on the world system,not so much for political stability but for survival.
As the volume of long-distance trade increased dramatically, so competition over resources intensified.  Each state raised an army to defend its water rights, trade routes, and city walls. The onerous tasks of defense and military organization passed to despotic kings supposedly appointed by the gods.  Such Sumerian city-states as Erech, Kish, and Ur had periods of political strength and prosperity when they dominated their neighbors.  Then, just as swiftly, the tide of their fortunes would change and they would sink into obscurity. 
Inevitably, the ambitions of some proud Sumerian leaders led them to entertain bolder visions than merely the control of a few city-states in the lowlands. They were well aware that the control of lucrative sources of raw materials and trade routes was the secret of vast political power. In about 2400 B.C. , a monarch named Lugalzagesi boasted of overseeing the entire area from the Persian Gulf to the Mediterranean. This boast was probably false. It is likely that Sumerian cities dominated the overland routes that linked Mesopotamia, Anatolia,and the Levant, but their influence was never permanent, their control probably illusory.
 
It can be inferred from paragraph 1 that before the rise of the Sumerian civilization, Southwest Asian societies had been
more densely populated
more independent of other societies in the region
more complex economically
more dependent on authority
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
As complex societies evolved in more and more regions, demands for a new world order increased.
The new world system placed increasing demands on regions of Southwest Asia in which more complex societies had developed.
Less complex societies in the new world system had to demand locally unavailable raw materials from more complex societies in Southwest Asia.
Demands by developing Southwestern Asian societies for raw materials available outside their territories led to the emergence of a world system.
According to paragraph 1, one of the causes of the social and technological developments in Southwest Asia at the time of the Sumerian civilization was
increased access to information
improved educational opportunities
competition for prestige and authority
stronger governmental control
According to paragraph 2, Sumerians lacked all of the following EXCEPT
semiprecious stones
metals
grain
timber
The word arduous in the passage is closest in meaning to
frequent
important
difficult
specialized
According to paragraph 3, in addition to the plow,which of the following was responsible for large increases in agricultural productivity in Sumer?
Irrigation
Large populations
Increased control by rulers
Increased use of digging sticks
Paragraph 6 supports which of the following statements about the Sumerian monarch Lugalzagesi?
He probably ruled over the entire area from the Persian Gulf to the Mediterranean.
He probably did not control more than a few Sumerian city-states in the lowlands.
He probably dominated the overland trade routes that linked Mesopotamia, Anatolia, and the Levant.
He probably lost control of the trade routes started by previous Sumerian monarchs.
The word lucrative in the passage is closest in meaning to
distant
profitable
major
particular

After the formation of the Roman Republic in 509 B.C., the Romans expanded the borders of their realm through near-continuous warfare. At its greatest extent, in the early second century A.D., the Roman Empire reached from the Euphrates River in southwest Asia to Scotland in the West. The vast territory ringed the Mediterranean Sea-mare nostrum,or our sea, the Romans called it. As the Romans absorbed the peoples they conquered,they imposed on them a legal, administrative, and cultural structure that endured for some five centuriesin the eastern Mediterranean until the fifteenth century A.D.and left a lasting mark on the civilizations that emerged in Europe.
Conquering and maintaining a vast empire required not only inspired leadership and tactics but also careful planning, massive logistical support, and great administrative skill. Some of Rome's most enduring contributions to Western civilizationits system of law, its governmental and administrative structures, and its sophisticated civil engineering and architecture-reflect these qualities.
To facilitate the development and administration of the empire, as well as to make city life comfortable and attractive to its citizens, the Roman government undertook building programs of unprecedented scale and complexity, mandating the construction of central administrative and legal centers (forums and basilicas), recreational facilities (racetracks and stadiums),theaters, public baths, roads, bridges, aqueducts (bridge-like structures for carrying fresh water from the mountains), middle-class housing, and even new towns. To accomplish these tasks without sacrificing beauty, efficiency,and human well-being, Roman builders and architects developed rational plans using easily worked but durable materials and highly sophisticated engineering methods. The architect Vitruvius described these accomplishments in his Ten Books of Architecture.
To move their armies about efficiently, speed communications between Rome and the farthest reaches of the empire, and promote commerce, the Romans built a vast and sophisticated network of roads and bridges. Many modern European highways still follow the lines laid down by Roman engineers, and foundations dating from the Roman era underlie the streets of many cities. Roman bridges are still in use, and remnants of Roman aqueducts need only repairs and connecting links to enable them to function again. The Pont du Gard, near Nimes in southern France, for example, is a powerful reminder of Rome's rapid spread and enduring impact. Entirely functional,the Roman aqueduct conveys the balance,proportion, and rhythmic harmony of a great work of art and fits naturally into the landscape,a reflection of the Romans' attitude toward the land.
Despite their sophistication as city-dwellers,Romans liked to portray themselves as simple country folk who had never lost their love of nature. The middle classes enjoyed their town-home gardens,wealthy city dwellers maintained rural estates, and Roman emperors had country villas that were both functioning farms and places of recreation. Wealthy Romans even brought nature indoors by commissioning artists to paint landscapes on the Interior walls of their homes.
The Romans particularly admired Greek art. Historians have even suggested that although Rome conquered the Greek world,Greek culture conquered Rome. The Romans used Greek designs and Greek styles of columns in their architecture, imported Greek art, and employed Greek artists. In 146 B.C, for example, they stripped the Greek city of Corinth of its art treasures and shipped them back to Rome. Ironically, this love of Greek art was not accompanied by admiration for its artists. In Rome, as in Greece, professional artists were generally considered little more than skilled laborers.
Although the Romans had gods of their own, they also adopted many Greek gods and myths and assimilated Greek religious beliefs and practices into a form of state religion.  To these gods they added their own deified emperors, in part to maintain the allegiance of the culturally diverse populations of the empire.  Worship of ancient gods mingled with homage to past rulers, and oaths of allegiance to the living ruler made the official religion a political duty-increasingly ritualized, perfunctory, and distant from the everyday life of the average person.  As a result, many Romans adopted the more personal religious beliefs of the people they had conquered.  These unauthorized religions flourished,despite occasional government efforts to suppress them.
 
According to paragraph 1, which of the following is true of the Roman Empire?
It included more territory in the early second century A.D. than at any other time.
It had reached the Euphrates River in southwest Asia by 509 B.C.
It endured in the eastern Mediterranean for about five centuries.
It allowed conquered peoples to keep their own government and cultural structures.
The word durable in the passage is closest in meaning to
convenient
attractive
low-cost
long-lasting
The word remnants in the passage is closest in meaning to
copies
plans
remains
surfaces
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Because the Romans believed that works of art fit more naturally into the landscape than practical structures,their aqueducts were always in use.
The Roman aqueduct is a functional and artistic structure reflecting the idea that architecture should blend naturally with the landscape.
The Roman aqueduct reflects the qualities of a functional structure rather than those of a great work of art.
The Roman aqueduct conveys the belief that a great work of art is often inspired by the landscape.
According to paragraph 4, all of the following were true of Roman roads EXCEPT:
They commonly ran alongside Roman aqueducts.
They extended from Rome to distant parts of the Empire.
They were built in part to facilitate trade and business.
They determined the course of some modern roads.
In paragraph 6, why does the author mention that the Romans stripped the Greek city of Corinth of its art treasures and shipped them back to Rome?
To explain how the Romans first became familiar with Greek designs
To emphasize that Romans usually removed possessions from countries they conquered
To illustrate the Roman admiration for Greek art
To argue that the Romans associated art with military power
According to paragraph 6, which of the following best describes how Romans fell about artists?
They respected Greek artists more than Roman artists.
They valued artworks more than they valued artists.
They considered artists to be far superior to skilled laborers.
They admired Greek architecture more than Greek art.
According to paragraph 7, the Romans made gods of their emperors partly in order to
encourage loyalty to the Roman state
imitate the Greek practice of making gods of important rulers
claim that their emperors were more powerful than ancient gods
promote the worship of Roman rather than Greek gods

Solar energy reaching Earth is responsible for differential heating of the atmosphere and thus air circulation as wind. Some of the energy of wind is transferred to the oceans, where it causes waves and is partly responsible for oceanic currents, although Earths rotation also plays a role in currents. Gravitational attraction between Earth and the Sun and Moon generates tides and, along with Earths rotation, causes most coastal areas to experience a twice-daily rise and fall of sea level. In short, the oceans possess a tremendous reservoir of largely untapped energy.
If we could effectively harness the energy possessed by the oceans, an almost limitless, largely nonpolluting energy supply would be ensured.  Unfortunately, ocean energy is diffuse, meaning that the amount of energy for a given volume of water is small and thus difficult to concentrate and use.  Several ways of using ocean energy are being considered or are under development, and one is currently in use, although it accounts for only a tiny proportion of all energy production.  Of the several sources of ocean energy --- temperature differences with depth; currents; waves; and tides --- only the last shows much promise for the near future. 
Ocean water at depth might be as much as 25 colder than surface water, a difference that allows for ocean thermal energy conversion (OTEC). OTEC exploits this temperature difference to run turbines and generate electricity. The amount of energy available is enormous, but a number of practical problems must be solved before it can be used. For one thing, any potential site must be close to land and also have a sufficiently rapid change with depth to result in the required temperature difference. Furthermore, enormous quantities of warm and cold seawater would have to circulate through an electrical-generating plant, thus requiring that large surface areas be devoted to this purpose.
The concept of OTEC is more than a century old, but despite several decades of research, no commercial OTEC plants are operating or even under construction, although small experimental ones have been tested in Hawaii and Japan.
Wind-generated ocean currents, such as the Gulf Stream, which flows along the east coast of North America, also posses energy that might be tapped to generate electricity. Unlike streams that can be dammed to impound a reservoir, any electrical-generating facility exploiting oceanic currents would have to concentrate currents diffuse energy and contend with any unpredictable changes in direction. In addition, whereas hydroelectric generating plats on land depend on the rapid movement o water from the higher elevation to the turbines, the energy of ocean currents comes from their flow velocity, which is at most a few kilometers per hour.
The most obvious form of energy in the oceans lies in waves. Harnessing wave energy and converting it to electricity is not a new idea, and it has been used on an extremely limited scale. Unfortunately, the energy possessed by a wave is distributed along its crest and is difficult to concentrate. Furthermore, any facility would have to be designed to withstand the effects of storms and saltwater corrosion. The Japanese have developed wave-energy devices to power lighthouses and buoys, and a facility capable of providing power to about 300 homes began operating in Scotland during September 2000.
Perhaps tidal power is the most promising form of ocean energy. In fact, it has been used for centuries in some coastal areas to run mills, but its use at present for electrical generation is limited. Most coastal areas experience a twice-daily rise the fall of tides, but only a few areas are suitable for exploiting this energy source. One limitation is that the tidal range must be at least five meters, and there must also be a coastal region where water can be stored following high tide.
Suitable sites for using tidal power are limited not only by tidal range but also by location. Many areas along the U.S. Gulf Coast would certainly benefit from tidal power plants, but a tide range of generally less than one meter precludes the possibility of development. Even areas with an appropriate tidal range such as the Arctic islands of Canada offer little potential because of their great distances from population centers.
 
According to paragraph 1, both wind energy and the rotation of Earth contribute to the creation of
waves
oceanic current
a gravitational attraction between earth and the sun and the moon
tides
The word harness in the passage is closest in meaning to
put into use
separate out
come to understand
identify the location of
According to paragraph 3, the concept of OTEC is tied to which of the following aspects of the ocean?
Deep waters of the ocean are often calmer than surface waters are.
Enormous amounts of water are available below the surface of the ocean.
Temperatures beneath the oceans surface water can vary greatly according to the depth of the water.
Waves and tides contribute to forming land sites that are ideal for running turbines and generating electricity.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Although the construction and operation of OTEC plants are expensive, many commercial plants have been built in Hawaii and Japan.
Although OTEC is not a new idea, experimental OTEC plants are limited, and commercial OTEC plants do not even exist.
Because successful experiments using the concept of OTEC have been conducted in Hawaii and Japan for several decades, there are now commercial plants under construction.
After several decades of research, small experimental OTEC plants are being expanded to operate as large commercial plants.
How does the author develop the discussion in paragraph 5 on the possibility of using wind-generated currents to generate electricity?
By providing examples of places where ocean currents have been used successfully
By describing the process by which wind-generated ocean currents produce energy
By contrasting ocean currents with other sources of water-generated electricity
By establishing a historical context for modern techniques of generating electricity
By mentioning the Japanese and Scotland in paragraph 6, the author is supporting which of the following points?
Some countries have come to depend heavily on power generated by the waves.
Unlike other countries, Scotland and Japan have had little success using energy from waves because of the effects of weather and corrosion.
The use of energy from waves is better suited for industrial purposes than it is for use in homes.
It is difficult to generate electricity by using ocean waves, even though it is being done to a limited extent in some places.
Why does the author mention the fact that tides have been used for centuries in some coastal areas to run mills?
To compare how energy from the ocean was gotten in the past with how it is currently gotten
To emphasize the difficulty of providing for the energy needs of the coastal areas
To explain why some coastal areas had more energy available in the past than inland areas typically did
To support the idea that the tides are probably the most easily converted source of energy from the sea
The word precludes in the passage is closest in meaning to
prevents
presents
prepares
preserves

There are many interesting adaptations that allow plants to survive in cool environments. One obvious strategy is dormancy (a suspension of activity) during the cold season. Most of the common trees in the forests of northeastern North America, western Europe, and eastern Asia, such as the maples, oaks, beech, birches, and ashes, are deciduous trees that lose their frost-sensitive leaves during the cold winter season. In most of these trees, the leaves suffer damage at temperatures of freezing or just below. The new leaves arise in the spring from winter buds that can remain viable at colder temperatures.
Most of the needle-leaved conifers of the northern and alpine forests, such as pines, spruces, and firs, do not lose their leaves during the winter. How do such evergreen plants escape intracellular freezing (freezing within cells) and tissue destruction when temperatures may drop to -40 or colder? In these plants, the onset of cool temperatures causes physiological changes that allow plant tissue to either avoid freezing or restrict freezing to extracellular areas (those outside of cells). For plants to avoid freezing, they must chemically alter their liquids into a form that is analogous to antifreeze in automobiles. The liquids in these plants can be cooled far below 0 and will not freeze. This process is called supercooling and is achieved by the metabolic synthesis of sugars and other molecules which, when in solution in the plant's tissue, lower the temperature for ice formation to far below 0.  Supercooling seems to be the prevalent mechanism of frost resistance in herbs.  For woody plants, supercooling is augmented by declines of cellular water content, greater cellular accommodation to deformation, and processes that allow water to accumulate and freeze in extracellular spaces.  The loss of water from the cells to extracellular areas increases the solute content (the quantity of dissolved substances) of the remaining cell water, making it more resistant to freezing.  The cell walls can accommodate the deformations caused by water freezing on the exterior of the cell. For northern and alpine evergreens such as pines and spruces, both supercooling and extracellular ice formation play a part in allowing the plants to withstand extremely cold temperatures. One interesting facet of these physiological adaptations to freezing is that most of these plants will still be damaged by cold temperatures if they do not have a period of cooling in which to adjust to the onset of winter. This process of physiological preparation for the onset of winter cold is called frost hardening.             
Some members of the cactus family appear to resist freezing during cool nights by radiating heat stored during the day in their thick, moist tissue. The greater the mass of the cactus, the more heat it can store and the less prone it will be to freezing damage during the night. How is it then that these cacti can survive cold temperatures when they are young and small? The giant saguaro cactus is perhaps the best-known symbol of the southwestern desert of North America. In the popular lore of North America, the distinctive shape of the multistemmed saguaro is a universally recognized icon that is used to represent deserts in movies, television, and comics. Yet, this distinctive and widely recognized plant is actually found only in the Sonoran Desert of California, Arizona, and adjacent Mexico. The saguaro cactus is damaged or killed if exposed to prolonged freezing temperatures. Desert climates in the northern Sonoran Desert are typified by warm days but sometimes experience nighttime temperatures that are below freezing in the winter. Young saguaros that survive are found sheltered beneath more frost-tolerant desert shrubs. The cover of these shrubs acts as a thermal blanket, capturing heat radiated from the ground and keeping the microclimate of the small saguaro warm at night. As the cactus grows, it eventually rises above the cover of the protective shrub. The radiation of heat from the stalk of the large mature cactus prevents freezing. This strategy works up to a point. The range of the saguaro is restricted to areas that do not experience more than about 12 to 24 continuous hours of air temperatures below 0. It appears that after 24 hours of freezing air temperatures, not enough heat reserve is left in the saguaro to keep the tissue from freezing.             
 
According to paragraph 1, which of the following is true of trees like maples and oaks?
They have leaves that are resistant to frost.
They are unable to survive if their leaves are damaged.
They have buds that do not produce new leaves until temperatures rise.
They can delay the production of buds until the arrival of spring.
Why does the author ask the question, "How do such evergreen plants escape intracellular freezing (freezing within cells) and tissue destruction when temperatures may drop to -40 or colder?" in the passage?
To introduce an account of the ways evergreen plants protect themselves from the cold
To suggest that losing their leaves would allow evergreens to escape damage from the cold
To point out that scientists do not fully understand how evergreens survive cold temperatures
To emphasize that studying evergreens may hold the key to understanding how all forest plants survive cold temperatures
The author mentions "antifreeze in automobiles" in the passage in order to
emphasize the difficulty trees such as conifers have in surviving
point out that freezing temperatures can seriously damage tree tissue
illustrate a chemical process in plants that prevents them from freezing
explain how conifers are able to raise the temperature in their tissue
According to paragraph 3, why does the mass of a cactus influence its ability to resist freezing?
Larger cacti tend to have less water in them, making freezing less likely.
Larger cacti can store more heat in their tissues and thus stay warmer at night.
Cacti with more mass tend to have deeper roots that take longer to freeze.
Cacti with more mass exchange more moisture with the air, which protects them from the cold.
The word "prolonged" in the passage is closest in meaning to
unexpected
extreme
frequent
extended
Paragraph 3 supports which of the following claims about the ability of saguaro cacti to survive freezing temperatures?
Saguaro cacti,whether large or small, have no resistance to freezing because they seldom face freezing temperatures.
Saguaro cacti living in the Sonoran Desert are less likely to die from freezing than those living in other areas of the North American southwest.
In different ways, both young and mature saguaro cacti are protected during a freezing night by heat that had been stored during the day.
Mature saguaro cacti can survive in areas that are too cold for the frost tolerant shrubs that shelter young saguaro cacti.
It can be inferred from paragraph 3 that saguaros are limited to areas in which
young cacti can grow taller than the shrubs surrounding them
temperatures remain below freezing for periods that do not exceed 24 hours
daytime temperatures are sufficiently high to enable cacti to store a lot of heat
there is enough heat radiated from the ground to protect cacti from freezing air temperatures
All of the following questions are answered in the passage EXCEPT:
How does supercooling work to prevent liquids in plants from freezing?
Why does the loss of water from plant cells and the collection of water in extracellular areas protect the water inside the cells from freezing?
How do members of the cactus family limit heat radiation during daylight hours?
How do frost -tolerant shrubs help protect young saguaro cacti from being damaged by extreme nighttime winter temperatures?

Jade and bronze were chosen early in China's history as the materials for society's most precious objects. The main reason for this is very straightforward. Both materials are beautiful to the eye and, in the case of jade, also to the touch. Jade is a dense stone that can be ground to smooth, soft surfaces and glows in subtle greens, grays, and browns. Bronze, an alloy of tin and copper, is a light, bright gold color when polished.             
Jade was employed (c. 4500 B.C.) for exceptionally elegant versions of utilitarian stone tools, bronze was the choice (c. 1650 B.C.) for the highest-quality cooking pots. Made in jade, the tools were not for daily use but for displays of status and power, and the bronze cooking pots were not for ordinary meals but were reserved for offerings of food and wine to ancestors. Jade and bronze were thus used for special ritual or ceremonial versions of standard everyday items.             
The materials themselves were scarcer and required more labor to work than ordinary stone and ceramic. That this was the case must have been as clear in the past as it is today and must have marked the objects as in some way exceptional. Not only the materials but also the ways in which they were worked demonstrated their exalted functions. Jade scepters (ceremonial objects of various shapes that were carried by influential people as symbols of authority) were ground more thinly than the stone tools they copied, such as axes or reaping knives. Had they been used to chop down a tree, they would have broken. Bronze cooking pots were made in intricate forms, with extra knobs and handles and dense decoration, all of which would have been impracticable on everyday ceramics.             
There would be no point in using these scarce and labor-intensive materials in place of common ones if they could not be immediately recognized as outstanding. Craftsmanship was therefore directed toward exploiting and displaying the particular qualities of jade and bronze that make them recognizably different from ordinary stone and ceramic. These qualities had to be made visually noticeable. Other qualities, such as weight or texture, can only be appreciated by holding the object, and fewer people will have the opportunity to pick it up and feel its features with their hands than will be able to glance at it quickly.             
Visual distinctions deployed to separate the ceremonial from the everyday can also be used to refer to smaller differences in the ranking of ritual items, separating those owned by kings from those owned by nobles. Such differences can be in size or massone piece being larger or thicker than anotheror in skill, with one being better crafted than another. We make such judgments when looking at ancient objects today, and it seems likely that some sort of similar assessment was made at the time.             
Two hierarchies, both visible to the eye, were thus achieved. First and most fundamental was a hierarchy of function, the ritual object standing above the everyday object. Second was the hierarchy within each category, with the more elaborately worked and often larger object higher up the scale. The rich and powerful owned the jade scepters and bronze vessels. What is more, these scepters and vessels not only expressed or reflected the status of their owners but they also probably reinforced it. In this way, jades and bronzes became bound up with the religious and political structures of the early Chinese state, and they remained so linked up to the twentieth century.             
It is therefore not surprising that at times when rulers and their courts wished to assert their authority, they commissioned large numbers of conspicuous bronzes. Further, when they wished to distract attention from weaknesses in society, they emphasized their power even more by increasing expenditure on ritual objects. Thus changes in the aesthetic qualities of jades and bronzes can inform us about the society that produced them.             
 Later generations of Chinese scholars of the Song Dynasty (A.D.960-1279) quickly recognized the link between the bronzes and jades and political power.  In their search for political legitimacy, they collected and studied ancient artifacts, pursuits that in themselves reinforced the high status of jade and bronze in society.  From the idea that political power resided in ancient objects, including calligraphy and painting, grew the first art collections.  
 
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 1 about bronze?
It is a heavier type of material than jade.
It is less pleasing to the touch than jade.
It was preferred over jade early in China's history.
It was a more common material than jade.
According to paragraph 2, objects made from jade and bronze were
special versions of ordinary objects
passed down from ancestors through many generations
used for everyday purposes only by the most powerful members of society
more widely used than objects made from ordinary materials
Why does the author include the comment about jade scepters that "Had they been used to chop down a tree, they would have broken"?
To point out the poor quality of early Chinese tools
To explain why so few unbroken jade scepters have been found
To illustrate that jade scepters were not designed for practical purposes
To explain why jade tools were eventually replaced by stone tools in early China
The word "exploiting" in the passage is closest in meaning to
paying attention to
discovering
taking advantage of
appreciating
According to paragraph 4, the qualities of jade and bronze that Chinese craftsmanship emphasized were
qualities that could not be immediately recognized as outstanding but required good taste to appreciate
qualities that could not be fully appreciated without touching an object in addition to looking at it
qualities such as texture or weight that could only be appreciated by handling an object
qualities that could be immediately recognized by just looking at an object
Paragraphs 5 and 6 support all of the following statements about jade scepters and bronze vessels EXCEPT:
Jade and bronze objects owned by people of higher status were generally better crafted than those owned by people of lesser status.
Jade and bronze objects owned by nobles were generally thicker and larger in size than the finer ones owned by kings.
Jade and bronze objects probably not only reflected the social status of their owners but also confirmed and strengthened it.
Jade and bronze objects played a role in the religious and political structures of China from early on up to the twentieth century.
According to paragraph 7, Chinese rulers spent more on bronze and jade objects at times when
there was economic prosperity
there were long periods of uninterrupted peace
the rulers needed to turn people's attention away from problems in society
the rulers did not need to emphasize their power and authority over their subjects
It can be inferred from the passage that jade and bronze objects in China were
owned only by people of high social status
difficult to distinguish from one another in value
produced in large numbers by scholars of the Song Dynasty
thought to be of lesser status than works of calligraphy and painting

Most developmental scientists now agree that both nature (genetics) and nurture (environment) are essential for the normal development of perception. However, there is still much dispute about the extent to which either nature or nurture is the more important factor. Points of view on this issue are more than just philosophical musings, they affect the kinds of experiments that are undertaken. I argue here that classifying particular aspects of perceptual development as either innate or learned presents us with an overly passive view in which either genes or environment imposes structure on the developing brain. In contrast, I suggest that perceptual development is better characterized as an activity-dependent process involving complex and subtle interactions at many levels.             
To begin to illustrate my point, let's consider some recent neurobiological work on the prenatal (before-birth) development of the brain in rodents. Neurons are specialized cells that transmit impulses or messages to other neurons, glands, and muscles.  The neurons studied in these experiments are those involved in binocular vision.  Experiments show that the prenatal tuning (training) of these neurons arises through their response to internally generated waves of electrical activity.  In other words, the response properties of these visual neurons are shaped by a "virtual environment" generated by cells elsewhere in the brain and eye.  Although the term "innate" can be stretched to cover this example of development, we could equally well describe this process as the cells "learning" from the input provided. Further, after birth the same neurons continue to be tuned in the same way, except that now their input also reflects the structure of the world outside. When we examine development in detail, it becomes harder to argue, as some theorists do, that "innate knowledge" is fundamentally different from learning.             
Another example of the role of activity-dependent processes in perceptual development comes from the ability to detect and recognize faces. Because regions of the human brain are specialized for processing faces, some researchers have argued that this ability is innate. However, experiments with infants reveal a more complex story. The tendency for newborns to look more toward faces turns out to be based on a very primitive, reflexlike system that is triggered by a stimulus as simple as three high-contrast blobs in the approximate locations of the eyes and mouth. This simple bias is sufficient to ensure that newborns look much more at faces than at other objects and patterns over the first weeks of life. One consequence of this is that developing circuits on the visual recognition pathway of the brain get more input related to faces and thus are shaped by experience with this special type of visual stimulus. We can now study this process by using new brain-imaging methods. Such studies have shown that the brains of young infants show less-localized and less-specialized processing of faces than do the brains of adults. It is not until they are one year old that infants show the same patterns of brain specialization for processing faces as do adults, by which time they have had as much as a thousand hours of exposure to human faces.             
Another example comes from the study of infants' eye movements to visual targets. Although newborns are capable of some primitive reflexive eye movements, only much later in the first year can they make most of the kinds of complex and accurate eye movements seen in adults. One view is that the very limited ability present in newborns is just sufficient to allow them to practice and develop new brain circuits for the more complex integration of visual and motor information necessary for adult eye movements. Once again, it appears that infants actively contribute to their own subsequent development.             
These considerations should make us skeptical about the many claims that are made for innate perceptual abilities based on experiments with babies of four months and older. In fact, when the same experiments were done with younger infants, quite different results have often been obtained, suggesting dramatic changes in perceptual abilities over the first few weeks and months after birth.             
Infants are not passively shaped by either their genes or their environment. Rather, perceptual development is an activity-dependent process in which, during postnatal life, the infant plays an active role in generating the experience it needs for subsequent development.             
 
The word "overly" in the passage is closest in meaning to
unlikely
automatically
apparently
excessively
According to paragraph 2, how does the tuning of visual neurons in rodents change after birth?
Tuning now occurs in response to internally generated electrical activity.
Tuning now occurs in response to a "virtual environment" generated by cells in the brain and eye.
Tuning now becomes innate because the "virtual environment" disappears.
Tuning now includes responses to outside stimuli.
According to paragraph 3, why have some people argued that processing faces is innate?
Babies are attracted to patterns that resemble the human face.
Babies have a primitive, reflexlike reaction to faces.
Some parts of the brain are devoted specifically to the recognition of faces.
Studies show that the brains of infants are less specialized than those of adults.
In paragraph 3, why does the author discuss babies' recognition of faces?
To contrast the development of newborns and rodents in terms of the roles of nature and nurture
To provide additional evidence for the argument that perceptual development is dependent upon activity
To provide additional support for the idea that nature influences development more than nurture
To describe how regions of the human brain become specialized during development
The word "integration" in the passage is closest in meaning to
union
distinction
understanding
achievement
What example discussed in the passage leads to the conclusion it appears that infants actively contribute to their own subsequent development?
Babies achieve more complex eye movements through repeated practice.
Babies learn some eye movements by imitating the eye movements they see in adults.
Focusing on visual targets may make it more difficult for babies to develop adult eye movements.
Infants are motivated to retain some primitive reflexive eye movements.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Different experiments on younger children often yield similar results about perceptual ability.
Varying the visual stimuli in the same experiment has been shown to change the perceptual ability of younger children.
The results of experiments on perceptual ability suggest younger infants change less dramatically than do older infants.
Experiments show that perceptual ability changes significantly in the weeks and months after birth.
The word "subsequent" in the passage is closest in meaning to
later
permanent
basic
independent

One of the first recorded observers to surmise a long age for Earth was the Greek historian Herodotus, who lived from approximately 480 B.C. to 425 B.C.  He observed that the Nile River Delta was in fact a series of sediment deposits built up in successive floods.   By noting that individual floods deposit only thin layers of sediment, he was able to conclude that the Nile Delta had taken many thousands of years to build up.  More important than the amount of time Herodotus computed, which turns out to be trivial compared with the age of Earth, was the notion that one could estimate ages of geologic features by determining rates of the processes responsible for such features, and then assuming the rates to be roughly constant over time.  Similar applications of this concept were to be used again and again in later centuries to estimate the ages of rock formations and, in particular, of layers of sediment that had compacted and cemented to form sedimentary rocks.
It was not until the seventeenth century that attempts were made again to understand clues to Earth's history through the rock record. Nicolaus Steno (1638-1686) was the first to work out principles of the progressive depositing of sediment in Tuscany. However, James Hutton (1726-1797), known as the founder of modern geology, was the first to have the important insight that geologic processes are cyclic in nature. Forces associated with subterranean heat cause land to be uplifted into plateaus and mountain ranges. The effects of wind and water then break down the masses of uplifted rock, producing sediment that is transported by water downward to ultimately form layers in lakes, seashores, or even oceans. Over time, the layers become sedimentary rock. These rocks are then uplifted sometime in the future to form new mountain ranges, which exhibit the sedimentary layers (and the remains of life within those layers) of the earlier episodes of erosion and deposition.
Hutton's concept represented a remarkable insight because it unified many individual phenomena and observations into a conceptual picture of Earths history. With the further assumption that these geologic processes were generally no more or less vigorous than they are today, Hutton's examination of sedimentary layers led him to realize that Earth's history must be enormous, that geologic time is an abyss and human history a speck by comparison.
After Hutton, geologists tried to determine rates of sedimentation so as to estimate the age of Earth from the total length of the sedimentary or stratigraphic record. Typical numbers produced at the turn of the twentieth century were 100 million to 400 million years. These underestimated the actual age by factors of 10 to 50 because much of the sedimentary record is missing in various locations and because there is a long rock sequence that is older than half a billion years that is far less well defined in terms of fossils and less well preserved.
Various other techniques to estimate Earth's age fell short, and particularly noteworthy in this regard were flawed determinations of the Sun's age. It had been recognized by the German philosopher Immanuel Kant (1724-1804) that chemical reactions could not supply the tremendous amount of energy flowing from the Sun for more than about a millennium. Two physicists during the nineteenth century both came up with ages for the Sun based on the Sun's energy coming from gravitational contraction. Under the force of gravity, the compression resulting from a collapse of the object must release energy. Ages for Earth were derived that were in the tens of millions of years, much less than the geologic estimates of the lime.
It was the discovery of radioactivity at the end of the nineteenth century that opened the door to determining both the Suns energy source and the age of Earth. From the initial work came a suite of discoveries leading to radio isotopic dating, which quickly led to the realization that Earth must be billions of years old, and to the discovery of nuclear fusion as an energy source capable of sustaining the Sun's luminosity for that amount of time. By the 1960s, both analysis of meteorites and refinements of solar evolution models converged on an age for the solar system, and hence for Earth, of 4.5 billion years.
 
The word "trivial" in the passage is closest in meaning to
similar
inaccurate
small
significant
According to paragraph 1, Herodotus' observations of the Nile River Delta were significant because they allowed him to
provide detailed records of the most significant floods in the history of the Nile
develop a way of calculating the age of geologic features
conclude that the Nile River Delta was as old as Earth
predict when the river would flood and when it would not
According to paragraph 2, James Hutton was the first person to
understand clues to Earth's history through the rock record.
work out principles of the progressive depositing of sediment.
realize that geologic processes happen in cycles.
describe the forces associated with subterranean heat.
The word "exhibit" in the passage is closest in meaning to
replace
show
cover
expand
The word "episodes" in the passage is closest in meaning to
occurrence
locations
effects 
combinations
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Hutton realized that if these geologic processes have always occurred at about the same rate as they do today. Earth's history is huge in comparison with human history.
Hutton's examination of sedimentary layers led him to conclude that throughout Earth's long history, geologic processes have been generally the same as they are today.
In spite of Hutton's contributions to the understanding of geologic processes, what is known about Earth's history is minor compared with what is known about human history.
Hutton's examination of sedimentary layers was quite vigorous for his day, and his conclusions about geologic processes are among the most significant in human history.
According to paragraph 4, what happened when geologists at the turn of the twentieth century tried to estimate Earth's age?
They ignored Hutton's findings about rates of sedimentation and thus tended to underestimate the age by a factor of 10 to 50.
Using the sedimentary record, they were able to guess the correct age within 100 million to 400 million years.
They did not realize that much of the sedimentary record is missing and thus assumed that Earth is much younger than it actually is.
They did not correctly calculate the rates of sedimentation and thus concluded that Earth is much older than it actually is.
The word "flawed" in the passage is closest in meaning to
several
specific
early
incorrect
Why is "gravitational contraction" mentioned in the passage?
To show that questions about the Sun's energy source were as interesting to early scientists as questions about Earth's age.
To provide evidence that Hutton's ideas led to advances in physics and astronomy as well as in geology.
To explain why there is such a tremendous amount of energy flowing from the Sun.
To cite a method for estimating the age of the Sun that was used to determine Earth's age.
According to paragraph 5, Immanuel Kant recognized that the Sun's energy
could not be sustained through chemical reactions over the long term.
came from compression resulting from the force of gravity.
was largely the result of chemical reactions that took place over a period of more than a millennium.
was necessary to fuel most of the chemical reactions on Earth.
According to paragraph 6, which of the following is NOT true about scientists most recent estimate of Earth's age?
It is based on information taken from the examination of meteorites.
It is surprisingly consistent with estimates from the nineteenth century.
It is confirmed by solar evolution models.
It puts the age of Earth at about 4.5 billion years.
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 6 about the formation of the solar system?
The Sun was already billions of years old when the planets were formed.
The planets closest to the Sun formed first.
Meteorites entered the solar system sometime after the planets were formed.
All parts of the solar system formed at approximately the same time.

A mineral is a naturally occurring solid formed by inorganic processes.  Since the internal structure and chemical composition of a mineral are difficult to determine without the aid of sophisticated tests and apparatus, the more easily recognized physical properties are used in identification.  
Most people think of a crystal as a rare commodity, when in fact most inorganic solid objects are composed of crystals.  The reason for this misconception is that most crystals do not exhibit their crystal form: the external form of a mineral that reflects the orderly internal arrangement of its atoms.  Whenever a mineral forms without space restrictions, individual crystals with well-formed crystal faces will develop. Some crystals, such as those of the mineral quartz, have a very distinctive crystal form that can be helpful in identification. However, most of the time, crystal growth is interrupted because of competition for space, resulting in an intergrown mass of crystals, none of which exhibits crystal form.
Although color is an obvious feature of a mineral, it is often an unreliable diagnostic property. Slight impurities in the common mineral quartz, for example, give it a variety of colors, including pink, purple (amethyst), white, and even black. When a mineral, such as quartz, exhibits a variety of colors, it is said to possess exotic coloration. Exotic coloration is usually caused by the inclusion of impurities, such as foreign ions, in the crystalline structure. Other minerals  for example, sulfur, which is yellow, and malachite, which is bright green  are said to have inherent coloration because their color is a consequence of their chemical makeup and does not vary significantly.             
Streak is the color of a mineral in its powdered form and is obtained by rubbing a mineral across a plate of unglazed porcelain. Whereas the color of a mineral often varies from sample to sample, the streak usually does not and is therefore the more reliable property.             
Luster is the appearance or quality of light reflected from the surface of a mineral. Minerals that have the appearance of metals, regardless of color, are said to have a metallic luster. Minerals with a nonmetallic luster are described by various adjectives, including vitreous (glassy) pearly, silky, resinous, and earthy (dull).             
One of the most useful diagnostic properties of a mineral is hardness, the resistance of a mineral to abrasion or scratching. This property is determined by rubbing a mineral of unknown hardness against one of known hardness, or vice versa. A numerical value can be obtained by using Mohs' scale of hardness, which consists of ten minerals arranged in order from talc, the softest, at number one, to diamond, the hardest, at number ten. Any mineral of unknown hardness can be compared with these or with other objects of known hardness. For example, a fingernail has a hardness of 2.5, a copper penny 5, and a piece of glass 5.5. The mineral gypsum, which has a hardness of two, can be easily scratched with your fingernail. On the other hand, the mineral calcite which has a hardness of three, will scratch your fingernail but will not scratch glass. Quartz, the hardest of the common minerals, will scratch a glass plate.             
The tendency of a mineral to break along planes of weak bonding is called cleavage. Minerals that possess cleavage are identified by the smooth, flat surfaces produced when the mineral is broken. The simplest type of cleavage is exhibited by the micas. Because the micas have excellent cleavage in one direction, they break to form thin, flat sheets. Some minerals have several cleavage planes, which produce smooth surfaces when broken, while others exhibit poor cleavage, and still others exhibit no cleavage at all. When minerals break evenly in more than one direction, cleavage is described by the number of planes exhibited and the angles at which they meet. Cleavage should not be confused with crystal form. When a mineral exhibits cleavage, it will break into pieces that have the same configuration as the original sample does. By contrast, quartz crystals do not have cleavage, and if broken, would shatter into shapes that do not resemble each other or the original crystals. Minerals that do not exhibit cleavage are said to fracture when broken. Some break into pieces with smooth curved surfaces resembling broken glass. Others break into splinters or fibers, but most fracture irregularly.             
 
The word "apparatus" in the passage is closest in meaning to
equipment
procedures
experiments
laboratories
According to paragraph 2, which of the following is a mistaken belief that people have about crystals?
Crystals always have a well-formed shape.
Minerals are generally composed of crystals.
The atoms of a crystal have an orderly arrangement.
Crystals are always solid and inorganic.
According to paragraph 3, how do different samples of the same mineral come to exhibit a variety of colors?
The samples have different crystalline structures.
The samples contain different varieties of quartz.
The samples differ in the impurities they contain.
The samples were formed in different exotic conditions.
Which of the following can be inferred about streak from paragraph 4?
When a sample of a mineral is rubbed on unglazed porcelain, the color of the streak is usually the same as the color of the sample.
In most cases, different samples of a mineral produce streaks that are all of the same color even though the samples themselves are of different colors.
When a streak is made. the impurities in the mineral are removed and the true color of the mineral is revealed.
Streak color is reliable for identifying minerals because a given mineral sample always yields the same color of streak each time it is rubbed.
It can be inferred from paragraph 6 that the mineral quartz
has no fixed degree of hardness
might scratch the surface of a diamond
is harder than calcite
has atoms that are weakly bonded to each other
The word "configuration" in the passage is closest in meaning to
effect
range
transformation
form
According to paragraph 7, which of the following is true of the cleavage of micas?
Micas are the only minerals to break along planes of weak bonding.
Micas exhibit poor cleavage because they tend to break unevenly.
Micas break in one direction, forming thin sheets with smooth surfaces.
Micas break in several directions, forming a number of angles and planes.
Why does the author warn "Cleavage should not be confused with crystal form"?
Because most people have the mistaken belief that the surfaces of crystals are planes of crystal cleavage
Because the author s characterization of cleavage in terms of smooth planes and the angles between them could easily be mistaken for a description of crystal form
To make the point that crystal form and cleavage are the same property only in the simplest cases of cleavage, such as mica.
To introduce a discussion of minerals the have cleavage but not crystal form

In the 1920s, Aleksandr Oparin, a Russian biochemist, proposed and developed the idea that life originated in the warm, watery environment of early Earth's surface, under an atmosphere mostly composed of methane.  The early seas were believed by Oparin to be rich in simple organic molecules, which reacted to form more complex molecules, eventually leading to proteins and life.  Then, almost 30 years after Oparin published his ideas, Stanley Miller demonstrated that amino acids, the building blocks of the proteins necessary for life, could form under conditions thought to prevail on early Earth.  Miller's experiment was elegant. He passed electric discharges through a mixture of methane, hydrogen, ammonia, and steam, and when he analyzed the results, found that he had made amino acids.  The discharges were a proxy for lightning, the gas mixture an educated guess about what the early atmosphere may have been like. Amino acids cannot replicate themselves, and are not themselves alive. Nevertheless, this experiment has long been recognized as a landmark for understanding a process that must have been one of the important steps in the evolution of life on Earth, the natural synthesis of amino acids. However, it now seems likely that Miller's experiments may not be directly applicable to the events of the early Archean (that is, early in the geologic eon that lasted from Earth's formation until about 2.5 billion years ago).             
One of the problems hindering understanding of the origin of life is that environmental conditions on early Earth are not known with any certainty. It is possible to make only reasoned estimates. For example, for some fairly long period of time after formation, perhaps as much as several hundred million years, the surface must have been much hotter than it is today. Continued impacts of meteorites, large and small, would have added further heat energy, and in the earliest part of Earth history the larger impacting bodies may have broken through the cooling crust to expose underlying molten material. Large quantities of volcanic gases would have been released into the atmosphere as lavas erupted onto the surface, producing a greenhouse effect far more severe than anything likely to result from human activity. It is quite possible that the early atmosphere was many times as dense as today's, and that the seas and oceans were hot. Some have even suggested that because of the high atmospheric pressure, the oceans could have been hotter than the boiling point of water today. However, life as we know it is quite sensitive to temperature, and no modern organisms are known to survive much above 100. It is unlikely that life became established until surface temperatures had decreased to this level, or lower.             
Although we do not know the precise composition of the early atmosphere, there has been enough progress made on this subject in recent years that it is possible to say with some certainty that the methane-rich composition envisioned by Oparin, and the methane-ammonia-hydrogen mixture used by Miller in his experiments, are probably not very realistic. Based on studies of our closest neighbor planets, Mars and Venus, and also considering evidence from Earth's sedimentary rocks, it seems probable that Earth's early atmosphere was rich in carbon dioxide rather than methane. On both Mars and Venus, carbon dioxide is by far the most abundant gas in the atmosphere. On Earth it is a minor constituent. But there is an enormous amount of this compound buried in the sedimentary rocks of Earth's crust, enough so that, if it were all released, our atmosphere would be much more like those of our neighboring planets. How did carbon dioxide gas end up in the crust? The answer lies in what geologists refer to as the carbon cycle. Through a series of chemical reactions, carbon dioxide from the atmosphere finds itself, in dissolved form, in the oceans. In seawater it combines with calcium to precipitate as calcium carbonate, the main constituent of limestone. Over geologic time so much carbon dioxide from the atmosphere has been converted to limestone in this fashion that there is more than 100,000 times as much stored as limestone as there is in the atmosphere.             
 
According to paragraph 1, why were Miller's experimental results significant?
They explained the chemical composition of Earth during the early Archean.
They provided evidence of the importance of electrical charges on early Earth.
They showed how a key step in the evolution of life on Earth might have occurred.
They demonstrated that amino acids could be created only in the presence of methane gas.
According to paragraph 1, in setting up his experiment, Miller assumed each of the following to be true EXCEPT:
Earth's early atmosphere probably included hydrogen and ammonia.
Lightning probably occurred on early Earth.
Electrical discharges took place deep below early Earth's surface.
Water was present in the early Earth.
In paragraph 1,why does the author remark that "Amino acids cannot replicate themselves, and are not themselves alive"?
To suggest that other researchers were unable to reproduce Miller's experimental results
To establish the fact that Miller's experiment did not fully explain the origins of life
To point out an error in Miller's educated guess about what the early atmosphere was like
To support a statement about the importance of Miller's experiment
The word "Nevertheless" in the passage is closest in meaning to
In spite of this
It is obvious that
By comparison
Therefore
Select the TWO answer choices that, according to paragraph 2, describe effects that would have resulted from the impacts of meteorites on early Earth. To receive credit, you must select TWO answers.
Materials beneath the surface became molten.
Seas and oceans became larger.
Heat was added to Earth's surface.
Volcanic gases were added to the atmosphere.
Paragraph 2 supports which of the following ideas about life on Earth?
Life on Earth probably first became established below the surface.
Life probably did not get established until several hundred million years after Earth's formation.
The earliest forms of life to become established were probably more sensitive to temperature than modern organisms are.
Meteorites were probably responsible for bringing the first organisms to Earth.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Because we still know little about the precise composition of Earth's early atmosphere, we cannot evaluate Oparin's theory or Miller's methane-ammonia-hydrogen experiment.
Current knowledge suggests that Oparin and Miller were wrong about the composition of Earth's early atmosphere.
We now know that it was very unrealistic of Oparin and Miller to think that they could identify the precise methane-rich mixture that made up the early atmosphere.
Recent progress in understanding Earth's early history indicates that both Oparin and Miller clearly envisioned the precise atmospheric composition of early Earth.
According to paragraph 3, what is the significance of the fact that the rocks of Earth's crust now contain an enormous amount of calcium carbonate?
It explains why Oparin and Miller believed that Earth's early atmosphere was methane rich.
It supports the idea that the atmosphere of early Earth was rich in carbon dioxide.
It helps explain where the carbon dioxide in Earth's atmosphere came from.
It provides evidence about the likely composition of the crust of early Earth.

Around 140 species of grasses naturally occur in the arid Great Plains grasslands of North America. One key to the prairie grasses' success is their ability to conserve water in a dry environment. Like most plants, grasses take in water through their roots and lose it as water vapor through tiny mouth-shaped valves, or stomata, in their leaves. The larger the surface of the leaf and the more stomata it bears, the greater the risk that the plant will lose too much moisture through evaporation and collapse.  Grasses are protected from this trauma by having a reduced number of stomata and by the design of their leaves, which take the form of narrow blades.  What's more, the surfaces of these reduced leaves are often modified - corrugated with ridges or covered in hairs - so that the wind can't sweep across the surface and draw out moisture.  The roughened surface holds a thin layer of humid air next to the leaf and thus helps to reduce the "evaporative demand," or drying power, of the atmosphere.  Some grasses, including western wheatgrass, June grass, and blue grama, roll up the edges of their leaves during times of drought to help keep their tissues from drying out.             
Why aren't the stomata kept tightly closed to seal moisture inside the leaf? The reason is that the stomata also supply plants with fresh air for photosynthesis. If plants sealed their stomata, this life-sustaining process would come to a halt for lack of carbon dioxide. But if the stomata are thrown wide open, the plants risk death due to the loss of moisture through their gaping valves.             
Prairie grasses resolve this dilemma by strategic scheduling. In the fierce blaze of the midday sun, the stomata close so that water vapor is held in and carbon dioxide is kept out. In this state, the leaf can capture solar energy and store it in energy-rich molecules (a process that requires sunlight but not carbon dioxide). Then, in the cool of the evening, when the evaporative demand drops off, the stomata snap open, letting water vapor trickle out but also permitting carbon dioxide to flood into the leaf. By mobilizing the energy that was stockpiled earlier in the day, the leaf uses this carbon dioxide to manufacture the sugars and other molecules that it needs for growth (a process that can be accomplished in total darkness). The result is that prairie grasses are partially nocturnal; they do most of their growing at night or in the early hours of the morning.             
Prairie grasses also have another ingenious way of evading the demands of the sun. Like many grassland creatures (prairie dogs, ground squirrels, cottontails, badgers, and so on), they take refuge underground. What we think of as "grass"---the aboveground leaves and stems---actually constitutes less than half of the organism. Between 60 and 80 percent of the plant, by weight, typically grows below ground. A 3-meter stand of big bluestem is anchored underground by a mass of coarse, fibrous roots that reaches as much as 36 meters into the earth. Blue grama, for its part, seldom lifts its seed heads very far above the ground, but its network of fine, branching roots can sometimes probe the soil for water almost two meters down.             
These extensive systems of roots push thirstily through the soil, intent on sucking up every available drop of water. But if the soil is very dry, as it is during periods of drought, the roots can't draw in enough moisture to keep pace with losses from the stomata. Grasses respond by transferring their most valuable resources (including sugars and proteins) from their leaves into their roots and, especially, into their rhizomes (underground stems). Dead to the world above ground - withered and crisp - the plants live frugally below the surface, drawing on their cached supplies and biding their time until the weather improves. When the rains eventually return, as they inevitably do, the grasses explode into action, sending out fresh rhizomes, which in turn put out fresh leaves and roots, to produce a burgeoning network of tender growth. The amazingly resilient blue grama can revive from dormancy, become green, and grow on as little as five millimeters of rainfall.             
 
In paragraph 1, why does the author mention ridges and hairs?
To argue that these characteristics are not found on larger leaf surfaces
To identify additional characteristics that help leaves conserve moisture
To indicate the possible locations of stomata
To provide examples of types of reduced leaves
What is the dilemma mentioned in the opening sentence of paragraph 3?
Prairie plants need to be close to each other, but the more plants there are in an area, the more difficult it is for each of them to get enough moisture for photosynthesis.
Plants open the stomata to let in energy from the sun, but this sometimes leads to a buildup of too much carbon dioxide.
When plants open their stomata, they lose water, but when they keep them closed, they cannot collect carbon dioxide for photosynthesis.
In strong heat and sunlight, plants need to close their stomata, but this uses so much energy that the plants cannot grow strong.
In paragraph 3, why does the author include the phrase "can be accomplished in total darkness"?
To explain how prairie grasses are able to grow without losing a great deal of moisture
To emphasize the damaging effects that sunlight can have on sugars and other molecules needed for growth
To point out how even a little bit of light can interfere with the plant's ability to collect carbon dioxide
To show that nocturnal growth is stimulated only after prairie grasses have collected moisture from the evening air
According to paragraph 3, prairie grasses do each of the following during the night EXCEPT
collect and store energy
manufacture sugars
open the stomata
gather carbon dioxide
According to paragraph 4, why do prairie dogs, ground squirrels, and other grassland creatures burrow underground?
To find grass roots to eat
To hide from predators
To look for water
To avoid the sun
Paragraph 5 suggests that when there is plenty of water available in the soil, grasses
lose many of their rhizomes
store sugars and proteins in their leaves
use as little energy as possible
take in moisture mostly through the stomata
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Until the weather improves, the plant must grow many new leaves to replace those that have died above the surface.
When the weather changes suddenly, the parts of the plants that are not protected by the ground may wither and die from the shock.
The plants still surviving underground will, when the weather improves, take the place of other plants that have died.
Until the weather improves, plants that appear lifeless survive underground by using heir stored supplies economically.
The word "resilient" in the passage is closest in meaning to
quick to recover
brightly colored
fast growing
complex

The first half of the nineteenth century saw dramatic changes in the economics of the printed word in both the United States and Europe, though the changes generally happened earlier and on a wider basis in America. In the 1830s and 1840s, sharp reductions in prices for newspapers and books in America highlighted the advent of an era of cheap print. Now there were daily newspapers that instead of 6 cents per copy sold for a penny or two. Now there were novels that instead of an earlier price of $2 sold for 25 cents or less, when the same books in Britain cost the equivalent of more than $7. So steep were the declines in the price of print over so short a period that they amounted to an information-price revolution, the first of several such episodes of declining prices that have profoundly affected information and culture during the past two centuries. Two mid-nineteenth-century American cultural innovations, the "penny press" and the "dime novel", were actually named for their low price. These were criticized for being cheap in both senses of that word: low in price and low in taste. But low price did not necessarily mean lowbrow. Increasingly, book publishers issued even the most esteemed works in cheap as well as expensive editions to reach as wide a public as possible. The information-price revolution also affected religious and political publishing, as reading became a basis of mass persuasion for the first time in history.             
Cheap print was not entirely unprecedented. In seventeenth- and eighteenth-century England and France, cheap collections of stories, ballads, and other miscellany had circulated among the lower classes. But since only a minority of the poor could read, most listened while a few read aloud; thus cheap print reached not so much a reading as a listening public. The expansion of cheap print in the nineteenth century in America and Europe was on a much larger scale, and it took place during a great increase in popular literacy. Together these amounted to a cultural watershed.  Traditionally, even in literate homes, books and other publications had been relatively rare and treasured objects; reading meant returning to a few texts, especially religious works.  But with the explosion of print, reading became more varied, and readers scanned newspapers, magazines, and cheap books that they soon passed on or discarded.  Intensive reading of religious and other works did not disappear, but reading became an increasingly common form of diversion as well as devotion.  
The usual explanation for the rise of cheap print emphasizes new technology. Unquestionably, the full development of cheap print could not have happened without technological change. Print, however, had already become cheaper in America before technological advances played a significant role; new technology arrived once the process was under way, not at the beginning. This was no accident: the continuing expansion of print created an incentive for technological innovation. To conceive of technology as the causal force is to understate the prior importance of politics, culture, and markets in creating the conditions that allowed investments in new technology to pay off.             
Cheap print was public policy in America. While European governments taxed newspapers and other publications, the United States let them go tax free and even subsidized them, to a degree, through the postal system. The rise of cheap books and other forms of cheap print in the United States also reflected distinctive patterns of nineteenth-century American consumer markets. As the economic historian Nathan Rosenberg remarks, citing the cases of cutlery, guns, boots, and clothing, "Americans readily accepted products which had been deliberately designed for low cost, mass production methods "at a time when handmade goods persisted in Britain. Books fit this pattern. Americans had not been primarily responsible for introducing new manufacturing technology to the production of books. On the contrary, most of the key advances in printing and papermaking before 1850 had traveled west across the Atlantic rather than the reverse. But the industrialization of book production proceeded more rapidly in the United States, where the market by the middle decades of the century was not only larger than in Britain but also apparently more sensitive to price than to quality, perhaps because elite readers constituted a smaller proportion of book buyers.             
 
All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 1 as being true of nineteenth- century print prices EXCEPT:
Prices first experiences a significant decrease in the 1830s and 1840s.
Daily newspapers that sold for 6 cents in Britain sold for a penny or two in America.
Some American novels declined in price from two dollars to about 25 cents.
Reductions in print prices had effects that lasted well into the twentieth century.
The word "unprecedented" in the passage is closest in meaning to
reliable
new
accepted
effective
According to paragraph 2, which of the following was true of cheap print in seventeenth- and eighteenth-century England and France?
An increase in popular literacy allowed cheap print to succeed.
Cheap publications of stories and ballads reached a wider readership in France than they did in England.
Decreasing print prices did not affect the reading habits of the upper classes.
Cheap print reached more people by being read aloud than by being read silently.
According to paragraph 2, reading changed in all of the following ways after the explosion of print EXCEPT:
Reading for amusement became more common.
People began to read books more carefully than they had in the past.
People began to read a greater variety of publications.
Readers began to discard books more frequently.
In paragraph 3, the author expresses which of the following points of view on the relationship between technology and the development of cheap print?
Changes in technology, politics, cultures, and markets all preceded the development of cheap print.
Technological advances were the most important causal force in the print revolution.
The arrival of new technology made the development of cheap print possible.
The growth of cheap print provided people with a reason to develop new technology.
Why does the author refer to Nathan Rosenberg's remarks on "the cases of cutlery, guns, boots, and clothing"?
To explain how new production methods used for books were quickly applied to other types of products
To point out similarities between consumer patterns in the United States and in Britain
To support the claim that books fit the pattern of the nineteenth-century American consumer markets
To explain why handmade products were not as popular in America during the nineteenth century as they were in Britain
The word "persisted" in the passage is closest in meaning to
spread
suffered
continued
improved
Which of the sentence below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentences in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
The American book industry's larger market and commitment to low prices prevented it from selling books that were similar in quality to the books sold to British buyers.
Industrialization of book production occurred more rapidly in the United States than is usually realized, perhaps because of the large markets and low prices that were common in the nineteenth century.
A larger market than in Britain and a greater demand for cheap books in the United States contributed to the faster industrialization of book production.
The industrialization of book production occurred more quickly in the United States than in Britain because elite readers in America were not as sensitive to quality as elite readers in Britain were.

Knowledge of Earth's deep interior is derived from the study of the waves produced by earthquakes, called seismic waves. Among the various kinds of seismic waves are primary waves(P-waves) and secondary waves(S-waves).  Primary and secondary waves pass deep within Earth and therefore are the most instructive.  Study of abrupt changes in the characteristics of seismic waves at different depths provides the basis for a threefold division of Earth into a central core; a thick, overlying mantle; and a thin, enveloping crust.  Sudden changes in seismic wave velocities and angles of transmission are termed discontinuities.  
One of the discontinuities is the Gutenberg discontinuity, which is located nearly halfway to the center of Earth at a depth of 2,900 kilometers and marks the outer boundary of Earth's core. At that depth, the S-waves cannot propagate, while at the same time P-wave velocity is drastically reduced. S-waves are unable to travel through fluids. Thus, if S-waves were to encounter a fluid like region of Earth's interior, they would be absorbed there and would not be able to continue. Geophysicists believe this is what happens to S-waves as they enter the outer core. As a result, the S-waves generated on one side of Earth fail to appear at seismograph stations on the opposite side of Earth, and this observation is the principal evidence of an outer core that behaves as a fluid. Unlike S-waves, P-waves are able to pass through liquids. They are, however, abruptly slowed and sharply refracted(bent) as they enter a fluid medium. Therefore, as P-waves encounter the molten outer core of Earth, their velocity is reduced and they are refracted downward.             
The radius of the core is about 3,500 kilometers. The inner core is solid and has a radius of about 1,220 kilometers, which makes this inner core slightly larger than the Moon. Most geologists believe that the inner core has the same composition as the outer core and that it can only exist as a solid because of the enormous pressure at the center of Earth. Evidence of the existence of a solid inner core is derived from the study of hundreds of records of seismic waves produced over several years. These studies showed that the inner core behaves seismically as if it were a solid.             
Earth has an overall density of 5.5 grams per cubic centimeter, yet the average density of rocks at the surface is less than 3.0 grams per cubic centimeter. This difference indicates that materials of high density must exist in the deep interior of the planet to achieve the 5.5 grams per cubic centimeter overall density. Under the extreme pressure conditions that exist in the region of the core, iron mixed with nickel would very likely have the required high density. Laboratory experiments, however, suggest that a highly pressurized iron-nickel alloy might be too dense and that minor amounts of such elements such as silicon, sulfur, carbon, or oxygen may also be present to lighten the core material.             
Support for the theory that the core is composed of iron (85 percent) with lesser amounts of nickel has come from the study of meteorites. Many of these samples of solar system materials are iron meteorites that consist of metallic iron alloyed with a small percentage of nickel. Some geologists suspect that iron meteorites may be fragments from the core of a shattered planet. The presence of iron meteorites in our solar system suggests that the existence of an iron-nickel core for Earth is plausible.             
There is further evidence that Earth may have a metallic core. Anyone who understands the functioning of a compass is aware that Earth has a magnetic field. The planet itself behaves as if there was a great bar magnet embedded within it. A magnetic field is developed by the flow of electric charges and requires good electrical conductors. Silicate rocks, such as those in the mantle and crust, do not conduct electricity very well, whereas metals such as iron and nickel are good conductors. Heat-driven movements in the outer core, coupled with movements induced by Earth's spin, are thought to provide the necessary flow of electrons (very small particles that carry a negative charge) around the inner core that produces the magnetic field. Without a metallic core,Earth's magnetic field would not be possible.             
 
The word "instructive" in the passage is closest in meaning to
inaccurate
intense
inaccessible
informative
According to paragraph 1, which of the following findings provides the basis for Earth's division into three parts?
All seismic waves pass deep within Earth.
There are no significant differences in the behavior of P-waves and S-waves.
Discontinuities occur at different depths within Earth.
Earth's crust is too thin to account for the size of the planet.
Paragraph 3 supports which of the following statements about the inner core?
It is smaller in volume than the Moon.
It consists of materials different from those found in the outer core.
It is subject to more pressure than the outer core.
It is not solid even though it behaves seismically as if were.
According to paragraph 4, why do scientists believe that Earth's core consists of materials of very high density?
Under the extreme pressure conditions near the center of Earth, any materials would become very dense.
Without a very dense core, Earth's overall density would not be as high as it is found to be.
Earth's deep interior is known to be solid, and solids are always denser than liquids.
Earth's core is known to contain the same high-density rocks that are formed on Earth's surface.
According to paragraph 4, why do scientists believe that Earth's core contains materials other than iron mixed with nickel?
In the absence of such materials, the core might be too dense.
Iron and nickel do not mix evenly without the presence of lighter elements.
Laboratory experiments showed that minor amounts of silicon, sulfur, carbon and oxygen are present in samples from Earth's core.
Iron-nickel alloys always contain minor amounts of elements such as silicon, sulfur, carbon, or oxygen.
The word "embedded" in the passage is closest in meaning to
active
revolving
formed
enclosed
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
A combination of different motions produces Earth's magnetic field, and the magnetic field is thought to cause a flow of electrons around the planet's inner and outer core.
The flow of electrons around the planet that produces Earth's magnetic field is the combined effect of motions that are thought to occur in the planet's inner core.
The flow of electrons around the inner core that produces Earth's magnetic field is thought to be the joint result of motions in the outer core and motions caused by Earth's spin.
Heat-driven motions in the outer core interact with motions caused by the spin of the inner core to produce a flow of electrons that is thought to result in Earth's magnetic field.
In paragraph 6, why does the author discuss Earth's magnetic field?
To cast doubt on its existence, given what scientists now know about Earth's composition
To provide additional support for the theory of an iron-nickel core of Earth
To present a puzzling feature of Earth that has not yet been explained satisfactorily
To explain why so many iron meteorites are found near Earth

Until the sixteenth century, almost all music was written for the voice rather than for musical instruments. Even during the Renaissance (from the fourteenth to the sixteenth century), instrumental music was, for the most part, the result of substituting an instrument for a voice in music written for singing or dancing. The seventeenth century marked the rise of music that lacked extramusical meaning. Like a mathematical equation or geometric formula, the instrumental music of the early modern era carried no explicit narrative contentit was neither a vehicle of religious expression nor a means of supporting a secular (nonreligious) vocalized text. Such music was written without consideration for the associational content traditionally provided by a set of sung lyrics. The idea of music as an aesthetic exercise, composed for its own sake rather than to serve a religious or communal purpose, was a notable feature of the seventeenth century and one that has distinguished modern Western European music from the musical traditions of Asia and Africa.
Not surprisingly, the rise of instrumental music was accompanied by improvements in instruments and refinements in tuning. Indeed, instrumental music came to dominate musical composition at the very moment that Western musicians were perfecting such stringed instruments as the violin, viola, and cello and such keyboard instruments as the organ and harpsichord. By the early eighteenth century, musicians were adopting the system of tuning known as equal temperament, whereby the octave was divided into twelve half-steps of equal size. Johann Sebastian Bachs Well-Tempered Clavier (1722) was an attempt to popularize this system to a skeptical musical public. The new attention paid to improving instruments and systematizing tuning mirrored the efforts of scientists and philosophers to bring precision and uniformity to the tools and methods for scientific inquiry.
In the seventeenth century, northern Italy was the world center for the manufacture of violins. The Amati, Guarneri, and Stradivari families of Cremona, Italy, established the techniques of making high-quality violins that were sought in all of the great courts of Europe.  Transmitted from father to son, the construction techniques used to produce these instruments were guarded so secretly that modern violinmakers have never successfully imitated them.  Elsewhere, around 1650, earlier instruments were standardized and refined.  Also during this period amateur music making was widespread, and professional performance also took a great leap forward, as a new breed of virtuosi inspired the writing of treatises on performance techniques. 
Three main types of compositionthe sonata, the suite, and the concertodominated seventeenth-century instrumental music. All three reflect the baroque style of European architecture, art, and music of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries taste for dramatic contrasts in tempo and texture. The sonata (from the Italian word for sounded,that is, music played and not sung) is a piece written for a few instrumentsoften no more than one or two. It usually consisted of three movements major sections in long instrumental compositions of contrasting tempofast/slow/fasteach based on a song or dance form of the time. The suite, written for any combination of instruments, is a sequence or series of movements derived from various European court or folk dancesfor example, the sarabande, the pavane, the minuet, and gigue, or jig. Henry Purcell (16591695) in England, Francois Couperin (16681733) in France, and Johann Sebastian Bach (16851750) in Germany all contributed to the development of the suite as a musical genre. Finally, the concerto (from the same root as concertato, which describes opposing or contrasting bodies of sound) is a composition consisting of two groups of instruments, one small and the other large, playing in dialogue. The typical baroque concerto, the concerto grosso (large concerto) featured several movements whose number and kind varied considerably.
The leading Italian instrumental composer of the baroque era was Antonio Vivaldi (16781741). Vivaldi wrote some 450 concertos. He systematized the concerto grosso into a three-movement form (fast/slow/fast) and increased the distinctions between solo and ensemble groups in each movement. Of the many exciting compositions Vivaldi wrote for solo violin and ensemble, the most glorious is The Four Seasons, a group of four violin concertos, each of which musically describes a single season.
 
According to paragraph 1, what is a notable feature of seventeenth-century music?
Secular ideas replaced religion as the central resource for new musical ideas.
Instrumental music was composed as an independent means of artistic expression.
Music combined the musical traditions of Asia, Africa, and Europe.
Instrumental music was written to serve the needs of the community.
The word skeptical in the passage is closest in meaning to
doubting
ignorant
growing
serious
Why does the author mention the activities of scientists and philosophers in the passage?
To indicate that the new emphasis on accuracy and systematization that was taking place in music was also taking place in other fields
To suggest that the study of music was no longer limited to musicians only
To argue that some of the changes in instrumental music originated outside of musical circles
To provide an example of professions that supported the new approaches in seventeenth-century instrumental music
According to paragraph 3, which of the following is true about the production of violins in the seventeenth century?
Violins were made at large manufacturing centers in northern Italy.
Standards of violin design were created and enforced by the great courts of Europe.
Several families shared design techniques to improve instrument quality.
Violins were carefully crafted according to specific family traditions.
The word refined in the passage is closest in meaning to
improved
tested
regulated
restored
According to paragraph 3, all of the following characterized the developments of seventeenth-century European instrumental music EXCEPT:
Instruments of superior quality were produced.
Manuals on performance techniques were written.
Individuals accomplished in playing certain instruments gained recognition.
Amateur musical performances replaced professional performances.
According to paragraph 4, what did sonatas and suites have in common?
They developed as musical genres before the concerto did.
Their movements did not allow for many combinations of instruments.
Their movements were based on dances.
They were more popular in Italy than in any other European country.
According to paragraph 4, which of the following is a characteristic of a concerto?
It was generally performed by only one or two instruments.
It required more violins than any other type of composition.
It was invented by three famous composers: Purcell, Couperin, and Bach.
It consisted of movements that varied in number and kind.

The Minoan culture on the island of Crete in the Aegean Sea flourished from about 3000 to 1100 B.C. In what is known as the Palace Period (ca. 2000-1450 B.C.), power was centralized in places and, later, in villas. According to one authority, the five primary economic functions of Minoan palaces during much of the Palace era were (1) production of manufactured goods, (2) consumption of food and manufactured goods, (3) regulation of local and internal exchange, (4) regulation of international and external exchange, and (5) use as depositories (storage facilities).
The production and storage of manufactured goods are evident from the archaeological digs at Phaistos and Mallia, important place sites. Excavations of the earliest phases at Phaistos (those from the so-called First Palace Period, which ended about 1700 B.C. ) revealed two areas dedicated to economic activity.  Unit A contained several large storage vessels originally filled with foodstuffs, including liquids such as win and oil.  Nearby Unit B was the palace workshop.  Here, excavators found tools used for stoneworking (a lapidary workshop), several loom weights (a weaving workshop), and two potters wheels (a ceramics workshop).  Clay sealings from a smaller room in Unit B may indicate where finished products were processed for storage or export. By the Second Palace Period (roughly 1700-1450 B.C.), there were even more food storage vessels present and an archiev room (a room for storing documents).
Similar finds appeared at Mallia. In the northwest quarter of the palace, excavators discovered obsidian, soapstone, and a reddish marble called rosso antico, all evidently part of the lapidary (stonecutting) workshop. A potters workshop was also present within the palace walls. During part of this period, the workshop of a bronze smithy was located just outside the palace walls. It is actually surprising that such an industry would be so close to any residential quarters, considering the unpleasant fumes given off by the work and the rather high potential for fires. Nevertheless, at a somewhat later date, the palace walls were extended so that the smithy was located within the place itself. Clearly, this was an industry over which the palace wanted to keep very close control.
The role of Minoan palaces as depositories and regulators of local distribution and trade may be seen in the koulouras --- large, stone-lined pits located at Knossos, Phaistos, and in a lightly altered guise, at Mallia. There is continued debate as to the purpose of these huge storage bins. It was originally suggested that they were rubbish pits. Some modern scholars believe that they were grain tree planters. But the usual interpretation is that they were for grain storage, with the koulouras at Knossos being able to hold enough grain to feed 1,000 people and the koulouras at Phaistos being able to hold enough for 300 people. In such a case, the palace would have received a substantial portion of the agricultural produce of the surrounding farms, stored it, and then distributed it to the more specialized, nonagricultural populace of the palace region.
Palatial control over foreign trade is more difficult to prove archaeologically, as there is often no way to determine where on Crete any specific item found abroad was made. One argument often brought to the fore is that only the palaces would have the capital (to use a modern term) to finance the goods and shipping for long trade journeys, not to mention to handle the risks of possible sea wrecks. Another argument, however, lies in the nature of the Minoan goods found abroad. For example, Kamares ware pottery from Minoan Crete has come to light on the coasts of Cyprus and in areas of the Near East such as Egypt and Syria.This Kamares ware is clearly a product of palatial manufacture. The ceramics from before and after the classical Kamares wares are clearly local creations --- Knossian ware being distinct from Mallian ware. By contrast, the Kamares ware made in the palaces in similar from palace to palace but is utterly distinct from the provincial wares. The number of foreign goods stored in the palaces especially Zakro, also gives evidence for the palatial control of international exchange.
 
All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 1 as possible functions of Minoan palaces EXCEPT
providing a market for agricultural and other products
providing protection against internal and external threats
producing finished goods from raw materials
controlling trade
According to paragraph 2, what change had taken place at Phaistos by the Second Palace Period?
The vessels used for storing food were larger.
More types of food were being stored.
New kinds of tools were being used in the workshops.
A room for storing written records had been added.
The phrase potential for in the passage is closest in meaning to
cost of
likelihood of
concern about
frequency of
In paragraph 3, why does the author mention that the bronze smithy gave off unpleasant fumes?
To show that the manufacturing industries of the Palace Period had certain drawbacks
To help explain why the palace walls were extended enough to bring the bronze smithy inside
To support the idea that the palace must have had a strong interest in controlling what happened in the bronze smithy
To explain why archaeologists believe that the bronze smithy was located outside the palace walls
The phrase altered guise in the passage is closest in meaning to
dated style
changed form
improved version
reduced area
According to paragraph 4, each of the following has been proposed as the purpose served by the koulouras EXCEPT as
containers in which trees were planted
containers for trash and other waste materials
bins in which grain to feed the nonagricultural population was stored
bins in which farmers could store grain for their own private use
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
One argument is that the risks of possible sea wrecks have been ignored in estimates of the palaces ability to finance goods and shipping in overseas trade.
One argument is that the palaces had enough capital to finance the manufacture of trade goods but not enough to handle the risk of sea wrecks.
One argument is that only the palaces had enough wealth to finance the goods and to take on the risks and shipping costs involved in overseas trade.
One argument is that the palaces are the only institutions that would have needed capital to finance the goods, shipping, and risks involved in overseas trade.
According to paragraph 5, why did the discovery of Kamares were in a number of places outside Crete provide support for the idea that the palaces had some control over foreign trade?
Because it is possible to determine in what part of Crete any particular piece of Kamares ware was made
Because Kamares ware can be clearly identified as coming from palace production centers
Because it is known that Kamares ware was produced only during a certain period
Because classical Kamares ware was produced only within Crete

Organisms of different species frequently evolve adaptations that make them utterly and specifically dependent on each other for resources. For example, many trees must have mycorrhizal fungi living in their root systems, fungi that are indispensable to the tree because they facilitate mineral uptake from the soil. In turn, the fungi rely on the trees to photosynthesize; they use some of the trees chemical food as their only energy source. Such intimate relationships are examples of coevolution through which two species become so interdependent that they can thrive only in each others presence.
At first glance, the relationship between pinyon pine trees and the pinyon jay does not appear to be one of coevolution. Pinyon pines produce cones and seeds that attract seed predators, especially the pinyon jay. A seed, of course, contains an embryonic plant for the next generation. Why sacrifice it to an animal? Some plants have poisonous seeds, an obvious adaptation to reduce loss to animals. Pinyons, however, have an array of characteristics that combine to encourage jays to visit the pines and help themselves to the seeds. Cones are positioned upward and outward on the tree, so the seeds inside are in plain sight of the jays, essentially inviting them to partake. Pinyon seeds are unusually large, and each seed is high in energy. The seed coat is thin, meaning that birds such as pinyon jays can not only ingest the seeds but also digest them. In many plants, an indigestible seed coat permits the seed to pass unharmed through the birds alimentary system. Pinyon seed coats differ in color between edible and nonviable seeds, signaling the jays as to which they should select.
Attracting seed predators would not seem to be a successful survival strategy for pinyon pines. However, pinyon jays are behaviorally adapted to bury any seeds in excess of their immediate survival needs. This is a useful behavior for the jays, providing they can retrieve some of the buried seeds during winter, and good for the trees, as the unretrieved seeds are ready to germinate. Still, for the jays to bury any seeds, there must be an abundance of seeds far beyond the jays immediate needs. One tree could never produce so many seeds, but if all the pinyons in a region produced heavy seed crops at once, they would indeed flood the market with vastly more pinyon seeds than the local population of jays could consume. In fact, that is exactly what the pinyon pines do.
It requires a great deal of energy to make so many seeds, so much energy that it is unlikely that a pinyon population could produce such a bumper seed crop every year. More important, however, it would be to the severe disadvantage of the trees to produce large seed crops annually, even if they could. Doing so would make the resource not only abundant but also predictable. Seed predators could, over the years, steadily build their populations, eventually increasing so much that they could, indeed, consume virtually all of the seeds. It is much more adaptive for the plants to produce seed cornucopias intermittently.  Doing so has several major advantages. First, energy can be stored for some years and then devoted to cone and seed production, ensuring adequate energy to produce a large seed crop.  Second, seed-predator populations will decline in years of low seed production, either through starvation, reduced reproduction, or emigration.  Pinyons in most areas have a roughly six-year interval between heavy seed crops. 
Pinyon jays have so completely adapted to the cycle of the pinyons that their reproduction is tied to it. Most species of birds mature sexually in response to changes in day length. In pinyon jays, however, day length is only one stimulus for reproduction. The other cue is availability of pinyon seeds. When seeds are abundant, jays can breed very early in spring, continue breeding through summer, and reenter breeding condition as early as the winter solstice. So the jay population temporarily enlarges in response to one of the intermittent large crops of pinyon seeds. But the increase in the population of jays is less than the increase in the size of the seed crop. Thus many of the seeds of a bumper crop are buried and subsequently germinate, many more than would germinate without planting by the jays.
 
The word indispensable in the passage is closest in meaning to
useful
necessary
available
adapted
According to paragraph 1, mycorrhizal fungi need to live in root systems of trees in order to
absorb minerals
gain energy
help the trees photosynthesize
evolve
The word partake in the passage is closest in meaning to
discover
see
remove
consume
According to paragraph 2, all the following are characteristics of pinyon pine seeds that make them attractive to seed predators EXCEPT:
The seeds are highly visible.
The seeds contain a large amount of energy.
The seeds pass unharmed through the predators alimentary system.
The seed coat is thin.
What purpose does paragraph 2 serve in the passage as a whole?
It presents an exception to the ideas about coevolution provided in paragraph 1.
It presents a puzzle about pinyon pines that later paragraphs will resolve.
It introduces for further discussion the fact that pinyon pines do not produce poisonous seeds.
It formulates a hypothesis that the rest of the passage will support about why pinyon pines attract seed predators.
It can be inferred from paragraph 4 that the reason the pinyon jay population in an area declines for several years in succession is that
after several years during which pinyon trees produce no seeds, there are not enough young pinyon trees producing seeds to feed the jays
for several years after a heavy seed crop, pinyon pines stop producing enough seeds to support a large population of jays
for several years in succession, pinyon jays spend most of their energy in collecting and burying seeds rather than in reproducing
over a period of several years, the pinyon jays in an area are displaced by other seed-predator species
According to paragraph 4, which of the following is a reason why pinyon pines do not produce a bumper seed crop every year?
Pinyon jays would stop burying pinyon seeds if a bumper crop of the seeds was produced every year.
Pinyon pines are genetically programmed to produce annual seed crops of varying sizes.
With any fixed level of seed production, populations of seed predators would eventually increase to consume the available crop of seeds.
The environment cannot support as many pinyon pines as a yearly bumper seed crop would produce.
What purpose does the discussion of paragraph 5 serve in the passage as a whole?
It shows that the population size of pinyon jays depends on pinyon pines but that the population size of pinyon pines does not depend on pinyon jays.
It provides evidence that pinyon trees benefit more from pinyon jays than the jays benefit from the pines.
It establishes that, fully understood, the relationship between pinyon pines and pinyon jays is one of coevolution.
It explains why in years of bumper seed crops, pinyon jays are unable to increase their population to match the increase in the number of available pinyon seeds.

Prior to the beginning of the Late Preclassic period in 300 B.C., Maya ceremonial centers of relatively substantial size had already appeared in Central America. The ceremonial center was a distinctive feature of Maya culture, acting as a focus for the community. Generally speaking, these centers were not what we would call cities.  Although they did consist of a number of large and varied buildings, they did not have a substantial resident population. Some scholars have even labeled these Maya centers vacant towns. Their permanent population consisted mainly of rulers, priests, and their attendants plus a limited number of artisans.  The elite lived in big houses or in palaces in and around the center.  The bulk of the peasant population lived in much more modest wood and thatch homes in the areas surrounding the centers. At certain times of the year, on the occasion of major religious festivals such as the one at the time of the planting of their crops, scholars hypothesize, by analogy to historical and modern practices, that the peasants would flock to the centers to observe and participate in the ceremonies. At other times of the year, some of the peasants would be called into the centers to help in the construction of new temples and palaces dedicated to the glory of the gods and to the comforts of their earthly representatives, the priestly rulers. The peasants also would provide the food to help sustain the elite in the centers.
What the peasants received from the elite was certainly not as tangible as the services they provided. In return for food and labor, the peasants were offered a psychologically and spiritually secure and ordered world, as well as access to some trade goods. Apparently, this was enough. Agriculture in the tropical Maya lowlands was at best a chancy business: even slight shifts in the onset of the rainy season or the dry season could mean disaster for that years harvest. The religion of the ancient Maya helped the peasants cope with their precarious lives. If the gods were properly propitiated, the crops would be goodas would life in general.
One archaeologist, William Haviland, argues that it was the centralizing effects of Maya religion that led to the rise of Classic Maya civilization. He believes that the religious centers acted as magnets to peoples living in the surrounding areas. To support the growing populations around the centers, Haviland argues, the agricultural systems became intensified. This led to the evolution of a complex state. Haviland believes that as early as 200 B.C., the vacant ceremonial centers at Tikal had begun transformation toward urban centers. Moreover, by this time or even earlier, other centers with huge, labor-intensive buildings had begun to emerge. Sites such as Nakb, El Mirador, and Lamanai may have approached urban dimensions in the last few centuries of the first millennium B.C.
Other scholars attribute the growth of the ceremonial centers to trade. William Rathje argues that the basic cause for the rise of Maya civilization was the necessity for the Maya, who lived in resource-poor lowlands, to trade with adjacent highlanders for materials such as obsidian (a rock used to make ornaments and cutting edges), salt, and hard stone for grinding implements. Rathje maintains that lowland sites such as Tikal, which were quite distant from the highland resource areas, were made bigger and architecturally magnificent to attract highland merchants and their trade. In order to undertake all the building, the elite had to attract more artisans and bring more laborers into the community to do the work. These population increases led in turn to even more building, population growth, greater population density, greater social differentiation, and occupational specialization. Critics have argued, however, that there were local substitutes for the external necessities and that foreign trade was present well before the rise of complex architecture.
Yet other factors beyond ideology and trade must have been important in the emerging Classic Maya civilization. Competition among the growing number of centers may also have played a key role in the growth of social, economic, and political complexity, as the organization of the centers grew to meet the pressures of other centers for new agricultural land and control of rising populations.
 
According to paragraph 1, what important feature of cities did Maya ceremonial centers lack?
Large, varied buildings
A large, permanent population
Distinctions between social classes
Religious temples
The word modest in the passage is closest in meaning to
distant
unpleasant
simple
temporary
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Scholars hypothesize that religious festivals have changed very little in history since the festivals that Mayans held at the times when they planted their crops.
Through the study of historical and modern practices, scholars concluded that Mayans held religious festivals only at certain times of the year.
Based on their knowledge of historical and modern practices, scholars suppose that peasants gathered in the centers at certain times of the year for religious festivals.
Historical and modern evidence suggests that peasants were allowed to visit the centers only during the crop-planting period because of the religious ceremonies held at that time.
According to paragraph 2, which of the following did the Maya elite provide for the peasants?
Food for nourishment
Homes to live in
Security from the threats of other civilizations
A stable system of beliefs
The word precarious in the passage is closest in meaning to
insecure
difficult
restricted
unsatisfying
According to paragraph 4, what is the dispute between William Rathje and his critics?
Whether a need to import obsidian, salt, and grinding stone can explain the growth of ceremonial centers.
Whether people in the lowlands communities traded with people in the adjacent highlands.
Whether obsidian was to be found in lowland areas such as Tikal that were distant from the highlands.
Whether the development of ceremonial centers was characterized by complex architecture.
According to paragraph 4, all of the following are associated with the rise of Maya civilization EXCEPT:
building construction to support an increasing population
increased division into distinct social classes
an increased number of artisans and laborers in the centers
the invention of new agricultural tools
Why does the author mention the arguments that there were local substitutes for the external necessities and that foreign trade was present well before the rise of complex architecture?
To explain why complex architecture at Maya centers may have developed later than most people believe it did
To suggest that foreign trade was a more significant factor than local trade in the rise of Maya civilization
To indicate why some scholars reject the idea that the architectural growth of Maya ceremonial centers was due to trade
To support the idea that minerals were not the main goods that the Mayas imported from highland areas

Around 1870, a little fruit-eating insect arrived in San Jose, California, on some nursery stock shipped from Asia. The pest, which became known as the San Jose scale, quickly spread through the United States and Canada, killing orchard trees as it went. Farmers found that the best way to control the scale was to spray their orchards with a mixture of sulfur and lime. Within a few weeks of spraying a tree, the insect vanished completely.
Around the turn of the century, however, farmers began to notice that the sulfur-lime mixture was not working all that well. A handful of scales would survive a spraying and eventually rebound to their former numbers. In Clarkston Valley in Washington State, orchard growers became convinced that manufacturers were adulterating their pesticide. They built their own factory to guarantee a pure poison, which they drenched over their trees, yet the scale kept spreading uncontrollably. An entomologist named A. L. Melander inspected the trees and found scales living happily under a thick crust of dried spray.
Melander began to suspect that adulteration was not to blame. In 1912, he compared how effective the sprays were in different parts of Washington. In Yakima and Sunnyside, he found that sulfur-lime could wipe out every last scale on a tree, while in Clarkston between 4 and 13 percent survived. On the other hand, the Clarkston scales were annihilated by a different pesticide made from fuel oil, just as the insects in other parts of Washington were. In other words, the scales of Clarkston had a peculiar resistance to sulfur-lime.
Melander wondered why. He knew that if individuals eat small amounts of certain poisons, such as arsenic, they can build up an immunity. But San Jose scales bred so quickly that no single scale experienced more than a single spray of sulfur-lime, giving them no chance to develop immunity.
A radical idea occurred to Melander. Perhaps mutations made a few scales resistant to sulfur-lime. When farmers sprayed their trees, these resistant scales survived, as did a few nonresistant ones that hadnt received a fatal dose. The surviving scales would then breed, and the resistant genes would become more common in the following generations. Depending on the proportions of the survivors, the trees might become covered by resistant or nonresistant scales. In the Clarkston Valley region, farmers had been using sulfur-lime longer than anywhere else in the Northwest and were desperately soaking their trees with the stuff. In the process, they were driving the evolution of more resistant scales.
Melander offered his ideas in 1914, but no one paid much attention to him; they were too busy discovering even more powerful pesticides.  In 1939 the Swiss chemist Paul Mller found that a compound of chlorine and hydrocarbons called DDT could kill insects more effectively than any previous pesticide had.  DDT was cheap and easy to make, it could kill many species of insects, and it was stable enough to be stored for years.  It could be used in small doses, and it didnt seem to pose any health risks to humans.   Between 1941 and 1976, 4.5 million tons of DDT were produced. DDT was so powerful and cheap that farmers gave up old-fashioned ways of controlling pests, such as draining standing water or breeding resistant strains of crops.
DDT and similar pesticides created the delusion that pests could be not merely controlled but eradicated, so farmers began spraying pesticides on their crops as a matter of course, rather than to control outbreaks. Meanwhile, public health workers saw in DDT the hope of controlling mosquitoes, which spread diseases such as malaria.
DDT certainly saved a great many lives and crops, but even in its early days, some scientists saw signs of its doom. In 1946 Swedish scientists discovered houseflies that could no longer be killed with DDT. Houseflies in other countries became resistant as well in later years, and soon other species could withstand it. Melanders warning was becoming a reality. By 1992 more than 500 species were resistant to DDT, and the number is still climbing. As DDT began to fail, farmers at first just applied more of it; when more no longer worked, they switched to newer pesticides.
 
The word vanished in the passage is closest in meaning to
recovered
disappeared
adapted
retreated
According to paragraph 2, how did farmers in Clarkston Valley explain the lack of success they were having with the use of the sulfur-lime mixture?
They suspected that surviving insects might have been a different variety of scale.
They believed that the mixture was not being applied to the trees properly.
They thought the mixture was being weakened by the manufacturers.
They assumed that the new scales were coming from nearby orchards.
In paragraph 3, why does the author compare the effects of sulfur-lime pesticide in Yakima and Sunnyside with its effect in Clarkston?
To provide evidence that a new pesticide made from fuel oil was more effective than the sulfur-lime mixture
To explain why Melander thought that scales had become resistant to the pesticide
To indicate how Melander discovered that scale insects were killing trees throughout Washington
To illustrate the success of farmers who chose to manufacture their own pesticide
According to paragraph 4, why did Melander reject the possibility that scales could have developed immunity?
Immunity could not effectively be passed on to the enormous number of offspring produced by scales.
The development of immunity to a poison usually occurs from eating small doses of the poison, but scales did not eat the sulfur-lime mixture.
The lifecycle of a scale is so short that no scale was exposed to more than one spraying of pesticide.
Only certain poisons lead to the development of an immunity, and the poisons used in the pesticides were not believed to be among these.
According to paragraph 5, how did Melander account for the increasing number of scales that were resistant?
A few scales developed mutated genes that gave them pesticide resistance, and these genes were then spread among later generations.
Farmers were using so much pesticide that only resistant scales could survive and reproduce.
Some scales that survived the pesticide did not have a genetic mutation for resistance and their numbers made it appear that scales were becoming increasingly resistant.
Scales receiving several low doses of pesticide over the course of their lives gradually built up an immunity.
What can be inferred from paragraph 5 about resistance to sulfur-lime pesticide in regions of the Northwest other than Clarkston?
The proportion of resistant scales was lower in the other regions because they used several pesticides not used in Clarkston.
The proportion of resistant scales was lower in the other regions because they had not used sulfur-lime pesticide as long as Clarkston had.
The scales in the other regions could not develop resistance because they were genetically different from the scales in Clarkston.
The scales in the other regions could not develop resistance because they were never exposed to the sulfur-lime pesticide.
All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 6 as true of DDT EXCEPT:
It could be manufactured at a low cost.
It was effective against many different species.
It did not need to be used in large doses in order to be effective.
It had been used successfully in Europe before 1939.
According to the passage, in what way did sulfur-lime and DDT have similar histories of use?
With both pesticides users at first had the false belief that the pesticide would completely eliminate pests.
In both cases it was found that widespread use of the pesticide caused health problems in humans.
Both pesticides were eventually used only in small quantities to avoid the development of resistance to the pesticide.
Users of both pesticides had the mistaken belief that the pesticide could be used to control diseases affecting humans, such as malaria.

Phytoplankton are minute, free-floating aquatic plants. In addition to the marked changes in abundance observed in phytoplankton over the course of a year, there is also a marked change in species composition. This change in the dominant species from season to season is called seasonal succession, and it occurs in a wide variety of locations. Under seasonal succession, one or more species dominate the phytoplankton for a shorter or longer period of time and then are replaced by another set of species. This pattern is repeated yearly. This succession is different from typical terrestrial ecological succession in which various plants replace one another until finally a so-called climax community develops, which persists for many years.
What are the factors causing this phenomenon? Considering that seasonal succession is most often and clearly seen in temperate seas, which have a marked change in temperature during a year, temperature has been suggested as a cause. This may be one of the factors, but it is unlikely to be the sole cause because there are species that become dominant species at various temperatures. Furthermore, temperature changes rather slowly in seawater, and the replacement of dominant species often is much more rapid.
Another suggested reason is the change in nutrient level over the year, with differing concentrations favoring different phytoplanklon species. While this factor may also contribute, observations suggest that phytoplankton populations rise and fall much more quickly than nutrient concentrations change.
Yet another explanation is that species succession is a consequence of changes in seawater brought about by the phytoplankton living in it. Each species of phytoplankton secretes or excretes organic molecules into the seawater. These metabolites can have an effect on the organisms living in the seawater, either inhibiting or promoting their growth. For any individual organism, the amount of metabolite secreted is small. But the effect of secretions by all the individuals of the dominant species can be significant both for themselves and for other species.
These organic metabolites could, and probably do, include a number of different classes of organic compounds. Some are likely toxins, such as those released by the dinoflagellates (a species of plankton) during red tides, which inhibit growth of other photosynthetic organisms. In such cases, the population explosion of dinoflagellates is so great that the water becomes brownish red in color from the billions of dinoflagellate cells. Although each cell secretes a minute amount of toxin, the massive dinoflagellate numbers cause the toxin to reach concentrations that kill many creatures. This toxin can be concentrated in such filter-feeding organisms as clams and mussels, rendering them toxic to humans.
Another class of metabolite is the vitamins. It is now known that certain phytoplankton species have requirements for certain vitamins, and that there are considerable differences among species as to requirements. The B vitamins, especially vitamin B12, thiamine and biotin, seem to be the most generally required Some species may be unable to thrive until a particular vitamin, or group of vitamins, is present in the water. These vitamins are produced only by another species: hence, a succession of species could occur whereby first the vitamin-producing species is present and then the vitamin-requiring species follows.
Other organic compounds that may inhibit or promote various species include amino acids, carbohydrates, and fatty acids. Although it is suspected that these organic metabolites may have an important role in species succession and it has been demonstrated in the laboratory that phytoplankton species vary both in their ability to produce necessary vitamins and in their requirements for such in order to grow, evidence is still inadequate as to their real role in the sea.
There is also evidence to suggest that grazers (animals that feed on plants or stationary animals), particularly selective grazers, can influence the phytoplankton species composition. Many copepods (small, herbivorous crustaceans) and invertebrate larvae pick out selected phytoplankton species from mixed groups, changing the species composition.
A growing body of evidence now suggests that all of the factors considered here are operating simultaneously to produce species succession. The importance of any factor will vary with the particular phytoplankton species and the environmental conditions.
 
The word "minute" in the passage is closest in meaning to
light
common
tiny
simple
According to paragraph 2, one reason temperature is not likely to be the sole cause of seasonal succession in phytoplankton is
the temperature of seawater changes too often.
seasonal succession usually occurs only in temperate seas.
the rate of replacement of dominant species is slower than that of temperature change.
certain dominant species have been observed at different temperatures.
The word "differing" in the passage is closest in meaning to
increasing
necessary
varying
high
Why does the author provide the information that "phytoplankton populations rise and fall much more quickly than nutrient concentrations change"?
To argue that the nutrient level not determine phytoplankton succession.
To argue that the succession of phytoplankton is actually the cause of changes in the nutrient level.
To indicate that phytoplankton populations are very sensitive to changes in the nutrient level.
To imply that changes in the nutrient level explain the succession of phytoplankton.
According to paragraph 4, all of the following are true about metabolites secreted by phytoplankton EXCEPT
They have a less significant effect on the dominant species of phytoplankton than they do on other species of phytoplankton.
They affect the growth of phytoplankton living in seawater.
They are secreted in small amounts by individual phytoplankton.
They cause changes in seawater that result in species succession of phytoplankton.
According to paragraph 5, all of the following statements are true about dinoflagellates EXCEPT
They produce toxins that inhibit the growth of other organisms.
Each produces a very little amount of toxin.
Their toxins can concentrate in clams and mussels.
Their toxins are dangerous only to other photosynthetic organisms.
The word "massive" in the passage is closest in meaning to
enormous
total
observed
increasing
The word "considerable" in the passage is closest in meaning to
often
a few
basic
significant
Paragraph 6 supports which of the following statements about a phytoplankton species that cannot produce thiamine?
It can be followed in a seasonal succession only by another phytoplankton species that cannot produce thiamine.
It can never become the dominant species in a seasonal succession.
It can be preceded in a seasonal succession only by a phytoplankton species that produces thiamine.
It is able to produce B vitamins other than thiamine.
The copepods mentioned in paragraph 8 are
one type of phytoplankton
stationary animals
selective grazers
invertebrate larva
The word "simultaneously" in the passage is closest in meaning to
without limits
at the same time
merely
spontaneously
Which of the following statements best describes how the passage is organized?
A description of a phenomenon is provided, forward hypotheses as to the phenomenon's cause.
Two phenomena are introduced, and the rest of the passage provides reasons as to why the first is more common than the second.
A group of species is discussed, and the rest of the passage explains the environmental factors threatening it.
A phenomenon is described, and the rest of the passage discusses effects of that phenomenon on the environment.

Until the second half of the nineteenth century, many scientists and philosophers believed that some forms of life could arise spontaneously from nonliving matter; they called this hypothetical process spontaneous generation. Not much more than 100 years ago, people commonly believed that toads, snakes, and mice could be born of moist soil; that flies could emerge from manure; and that maggots, the larvae of flies, could arise from decaying corpses.
A strong opponent of spontaneous generation, the Italian physician Francesco Redi, set out in 1668 to demonstrate that maggots did not arise spontaneously from decaying meat. Redi filled three jars with decaying meat and sealed them tightly. Then he arranged three other jars similarly but left them open. Maggots appeared in the open vessels after flies entered the jars and laid their eggs, but the sealed containers showed no signs of maggots. Still, Redis antagonists were not convinced; they claimed that fresh air was needed for spontaneous generation.  So Redi set up a second experiment, in which three jars were covered with a fine net instead of being sealed.  No larvae appeared in the net-covered jars, even though air was present.  Maggots appeared only when flies were allowed to leave their eggs on the meat. 
Redis results were a serious blow to the long-held belief that large forms of life could arise from nonlife. However, many scientists still believed that tiny microorganisms were simple enough to be generated from nonliving materials.
The case for spontaneous generation of microorganisms seemed to be strengthened in 1745, when John Needham, an Englishman, found that even after he heated nutrient fluids (chicken broth and corn broth) before pouring them into covered flasks, the cooled solutions were soon teeming with microorganisms. Needham claimed that microbes developed spontaneously from the fluids. Twenty years later, Lazzaro Spallanzani, an Italian scientist, suggested that microorganisms from the air probably had entered Needhams solutions after they were boiled. Spallanzani showed that nutrient fluids heated after being sealed in a flask did not develop microbial growth. Needham responded by claiming the vital force necessary for spontaneous generation had been destroyed by the heat and was kept out of the flasks by the seals.
This intangible vital force was given all the more credence shortly after Spallanzanis experiment, when Laurent Lavoisier showed the importance of oxygen to life. Spallanzanis observations were criticized on the grounds that there was not enough oxygen in the sealed flasks to support microbial life.
The issue was still unresolved in 1858, when the German scientist Rudolf Virchow challenged spontaneous generation with the concept of biogenesis, the claim that living cells can arise only from preexisting living cells. Arguments about spontaneous generation continued until 1861, when the work of the French scientist Louis Pasteur ended the debate.
With a series of ingenious and persuasive experiments, Pasteur demonstrated that microorganisms are present in the air and can contaminate sterile solutions, but air itself does not create microbes. He filled several short-necked flasks with beef broth and then boiled their contents. Some were then left open and allowed to cool. In a few days, these flasks were found to be contaminated with microbes. The other flasks, sealed after boiling, were free of microorganisms. From these results, Pasteur reasoned that microbes in the air were the agents responsible for contaminating nonliving matter such as the broths in Needhams flasks.
Pasteur next placed broth in open-ended long-necked flasks and bent the necks into S-shaped curves. The contents of these flasks were then boiled and cooled. The broth in the flasks did not decay and showed no signs of life, even after months. Pasteurs unique design allowed air to pass into the flask, but the curved neck trapped any airborne microorganisms that might have contaminated the broth.
Pasteur showed that microorganisms can be present in nonliving matteron solids, in liquids, and in the air. His work provided evidence that microorganisms cannot originate from mysterious forces present in nonliving materials. Rather, any appearance of spontaneous life in nonliving solutions can be attributed to microorganisms that were already present in the air or in the fluids themselves.
 
The word hypothetical in the passage is closest in meaning to
biological
observable
supposed
repeated
According to paragraph 2, the purpose of Redis second experiment was to show that spontaneous generation did not occur when
air was allowed to enter the net-covered jars
flies were allowed to enter the open jars
larvae were removed from net-covered jars
meat decay was prevented
According to paragraph 3, how did Redis experiments change the debate over spontaneous generation?
His experiments strengthened the belief that large organisms could be generated from small organisms.
His experiments suggested that simple organisms could be generated from nonliving things.
His experiments provided evidence that at least some kinds of organisms did not arise spontaneously.
His experiments showed that small organisms survived the absence of air more easily than large ones did.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
John Needham seemed to confirm the idea of spontaneous generation when he found that heated broth remained uncontaminated but that numerous microorganisms appeared in cool broth.
John Needham gave support to the idea of spontaneous generation by showing that microorganisms appeared in broth that was heated before being placed in sealed containers.
John Needham seemed to show that microorganisms were generated spontaneously in broth that had been sealed before being heated and then cooled.
John Needham seemed to show that the spontaneous generation of microorganisms was more likely to occur in greater quantity in heated rather than cooled broth.
In paragraph 4, why does the author discuss Spallanzanis experiment of heating nutrient fluids after they were sealed in flasks?
To explain why Spallanzani concluded that Needhams solutions had probably been contaminated with microbes from the air
To illustrate the increasing accuracy of theories about life forms based on experiments conducted during the eighteenth century
To explain why nutrient solutions that were heated and then cooled in covered flasks contained microorganisms
To illustrate how the boiling of nutrient solutions had affected the results of Needhams experiments
Paragraphs 6-8 suggest which of the following about the relationship between Pasteurs experiments and Virchows concept of biogenesis?
In his description of the concept of biogenesis, Virchow proposed experiments similar to those later conducted by Pasteur.
Pasteurs experiments supported Virchows idea that living organisms could arise only from other living organisms.
Pasteurs experiments renewed the arguments about spontaneous generation, which were finally settled by Virchows theory.
Pasteurs experiments ended the debate about Virchows concept of biogenesis by showing that the theory did not explain how microorganisms were generated.
According to paragraph 7, why did Pasteur think that the microorganisms that had contaminated the liquids in his experiment had come from the air?
Previous experiments had shown that microbes in the air could contaminate sterile liquids.
The microorganisms appeared only in the broth in flasks that had been left open to the air.
The microorganisms appeared in the broth in sealed flasks only after a few days had passed.
The microorganisms appeared in the broth in flasks that had been unsealed, heated, and then resealed.
According to paragraphs 7 and 8, Pasteurs experiment involving flasks with S-shaped necks proved that
air does not cause microorganisms to arise spontaneously from nonliving matter
microorganisms require access to nutrient fluids in order to arise spontaneously
the temperature of liquids has no effect on the presence or absence of microorganisms
microorganisms in the air cannot travel long distances

Beginning in 1904, American commercial filmmaking became increasingly oriented toward storytelling. Moreover, with the new emphasis on one-reel films, narratives became longer and necessitated a series of camera shots. Filmmakers faced the challenge of making story films that would be comprehensible to audiences. How could techniques of editing, camerawork, acting, and lighting be combined so as to clarify what was happening in a film? How could the spectator grasp where and when the action was occurring?
Over the span of several years, filmmakers solved such problems. Sometimes they influenced each other, while at other times two filmmakers might happen on the same technique independently. Some devices were tried and abandoned. By 1917, filmmakers had worked out a system of formal principles that were standard in American filmmaking. That system has come to be called the classical Hollywood cinema. Despite that name, many of the basic principles of the system were being worked out before filmmaking was centered in Hollywood, and, indeed, many of those principles were first tried in other countries. In the years before the First World War, film style was still largely international, since films circulated widely outside their country of origin.
The basic problem that confronted filmmakers early in the silent-movie era was that audiences could not understand the causal, spatial, and temporal relations in many films. If the editing abruptly changed locales, the spectator might not grasp where the new action was occurring. An actors elaborate pantomime might fail to convey the meaning of a crucial action. A review of a 1906 film lays out the problem: Regardless of the fact that there are a number of good motion pictures brought out, it is true that there are some which, although photographically good, are poor because the manufacturer, being familiar with the picture and the plot, does not take into consideration that the film was not made for him but for the audience. A movie recently seen was very good photographically, but the story could not be understood by the audience. In a few theaters, a lecturer might explain the plot as the film unrolled, but producers could not rely on such aids.

Filmmakers came to assume that a film should guide the spectators attention, making every aspect of the story on the screen as clear as possible. In particular, films increasingly set up a chain of narrative causes and effects. One event would plainly lead to an effect, which would in turn cause another effect, and so on. Moreover, an event was typically caused by a characters beliefs or desires. Character psychology had not been particularly important in early films.  Comical chases or brief melodramas depended more on physical action or familiar situations than on character traits.  Increasingly after 1907, however, character psychology motivated actions.  By following a series of characters goals and resulting conflicts, the spectator could comprehend the action. 

Every aspect of the silent-film style came to be used to enhance narrative clarity. Staging or framing action in depth could show the spatial relationships among elements. Intertitles written texts appearing periodically throughout a silent movie to explain the action could add narrative information beyond what the images conveyed. Closer views of the actors could suggest their emotions more precisely. Color, set design, and lighting could imply time of day, the milieu of the action, and so on.

Some of the most important innovations of this period involved the ways in which camera shots were put together, or edited, to create a story. In one sense, editing was a boon to the filmmaker, permitting instant movement from one space to another or cuts to closer views to reveal details. But if the spectator could not keep track of the temporal or spatial relations between one shot and the next, editing might also lead to confusion. In some cases, intertitles could help. Editing also came to emphasize continuity among shots. Certain visual cues indicated that time was flowing uninterruptedly across cuts. Between scenes, other cues might suggest how much time had been skipped over. When a cut moved from one space to another, the director found ways to orient the viewer.

 
Paragraph 1 implies that compared with later films, American films before 1904 were
less likely to be made for commercial reasons
less likely to be narrative films
more likely to combine editing, camerawork, acting and lighting
more likely to be filmed using multiple camera shots
According to paragraph 2, which of the following is true about the filmmaking style known as classical Hollywood cinema?
It consisted of devices that were tried elsewhere but abandoned.
Its principles were largely developed after 1917.
A great many international filmmakers adopted it after the First World War.
A large number of its principles were developed outside the United States.
According to paragraph 3, which of the following did NOT generally cause a lack of understanding in very early silent-movie audiences?
Lack of familiarity with the plot
Shifts in time from scene to scene
Shifts in place from scene to scene
Poor photography by the filmmakers
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
A number of well-photographed films need improvements to their plots so that audiences will not consider them to be inferior.
Some photographically good films are nonetheless poor films overall because the filmmaker, who knows what the film is about, forgets that the audience does not.
Manufacturers of films need to help familiarize audiences with the good motion pictures that are brought out because the films were not made with the audience in mind.
Regardless of the number of good motion pictures that are brought out, there will still be many that audiences will consider to be poor.
According to paragraph 4, all of the following were characteristic of early films EXCEPT:
character development
slapstick chases
physical action
familiar situations
The word imply in the passage is closest in meaning to
indicate
determine
illustrate
define
According to paragraph 6, early filmmakers provided visual cues to audiences in order to
explain the intertitles
eliminate the need for editing
provide essential background information
reveal character traits
Which of the following best describes the overall organization of the passage?
A theory is introduced, and supporting evidence for it is evaluated.
A position is introduced, and then opposing views are discussed.
Innovations are presented, and their impacts are questioned.
Problems are presented, and means used to solve them are discussed.

In 1912, the German geologist Alfred Wegener proposed that Earths continents are mobile rafts of lighter crust that have shifted over time by plowing their way through the denser crust of the oceans.  The theory, called continental drift, was partly motivated by the apparent fit, like puzzle pieces, of the coastlines of South America and Africa.  Wegener first presented his theory of continental drift at a meeting and in a paper, and then as a book, The Origin of Continents and Oceans, published in 1915.  He continued to write updated versions of this work until his death in an ill-fated expedition to Greenland in 1930.  Wegener maintained that Earth is composed of concentric shells of increasing density from crust to core. The outermost shell is not continuous but made of continental blocks of lighter rock called sial (an acronym for silica- and aluminum-rich rock) floating in the denser sima (silica- and magnesia-rich rock) underlying the oceans. All the continents had been joined in the supercontinent of Pangaea. As the continent broke up, the pieces moving apart left bits behind, explaining the presence of nonvolcanic islands and island chains, according to Wegener. Where the moving pieces collided, mountains formed. They were thrust up either by the plowing of the continents through the sima, as in the case of the Andes, or by the colliding of two blocks of sial, as in the case of the Himalayas. As for the force driving continental drift, Wegener initially invoked Polfluchtkrafta force causing flight from the poles as a result of Earths rotationand later the tidal force resulting from the gravitational attraction between Earth and the Moon and Sun.
One of the most influential geologists to join the mobilist camp, as the drifters school became known, was Arthur Holmes. Holmes recognized the importance of radioactive heatwhich had recently been discoveredand realized that there must be a mechanism to remove it from Earths interior. That mechanism, he argued, is convectionthe rising of less dense material and the sinking of more dense material. He went on to propose that the mantle (the part of Earths interior below the outer crust and above the core) convects in large, circulating patterns, and that this motion carries the continents across Earths surface. He also related crustal movement and mantle convection to the evolution of mountain belts. Wegener adopted Holmess mechanism in the last rendition of his theory. Holmes, for his part, presented his grand concept of a dynamic Earth in his influential and popular text Principles of Physical Geology, published in 1944.
Although it was eventually supplanted by the theory of plate tectonics, Wegeners theory of continental drift influenced science because it explained disparate observations, because it was placed in the context of existing theories, and because it offered a coherent view of Earths evolution. For example, Wegener showed not only that the coastlines on opposite sides of the Atlantic fit together, but that geologic features on the different continents fit as well. He asserted that the Appalachians, which can be traced northward through the Canadian Maritime Provinces, match the Caledonian Mountains in Scotland and Norway. He marshaled evidence from the distributions of fossil and living species to argue that land bridges joining continents were less likely than a single continent. The example commonly cited is that of Mesosaurus, a shoreline scavenger reptile that lived in the Permian period and is found as fossils in rocks on both sides of the South Atlantic Ocean. Mesosaurus was thought not to be a great swimmer, certainly not able to cross an ocean.
Wegener also found supporting evidence in ancient climates. Mounting observations indicated that the past climate of many regions was much different from the present climate. In the tropics, geologists had found sand and gravel left by ancient glaciers, and in rainy regions they had located prehistoric deserts. Then there was the discovery, by a British expedition, of plant fossils only 600 kilometers (370 miles) from the South Pole. Particularly puzzling was evidence suggesting that widely different climates in different regions had occurred at the same time, so one could not account for different climates by claiming simply that the whole of Earth was once hotter or once cooler than now. Wegener solved this dilemma by showing that observations of paleoclimate could be explained if the positions of the continents had shifted relative to those of the poles.
 
According to paragraph 1, the presence of nonvolcanic islands was an indication to Wegener that
the sial was lighter than was once believed
a supercontinent that existed at one time broke apart
nonvolcanic islands were formed from the sima rather than the sial
island chains existed prior to the formation of the supercontinent Pangaea
Why are the Andes and Himalaya mountains mentioned in the discussion in paragraph 1?
To contrast the ways in which islands and mountains formed
To describe two ways in which movements of land formed mountains
To provide examples of mountain ranges that are no longer in their original locations
To explain the differences between sial and sima with well-known geographic areas
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Wegeners term Polfluchtkraft was first used to mean Earths rotation and later the  gravitational attraction between Earth and the Moon and Sun.
Continental drift required a powerful driving force that was created by the combination of Earths rotation and tidal movements, which Wegener called Polfluchtkraft.
At first Wegener believed that the movement of the continents was caused by Earths rotation but later came to believe that the drift was caused by powerful tides.
According to Wegener, the great force of continental drift first affected Earths rotation at the poles and later also affected the gravitational force of Earths tides.
What does paragraph 2 suggest about how Holmes influenced Wegeners thinking?
He encouraged Wegener to consult the geologists who formed the drifters school.
He convinced Wegener that the mantle contained a great deal of radioactive heat.
He demonstrated to Wegener that the density of geographic material was less important than its pattern of movement.
He provided Wegener with a more accurate explanation of the mechanism by which continents moved and mountains evolved.
What is the importance of Wegeners observation that the Appalachians, which can be traced northward through the Canadian Maritime Provinces, match the Caledonian Mountains in Scotland and Norway?
It provides additional evidence for Wegeners claim that separate continents were once connected to each other.
It indicates that the mechanism by which all mountainous areas on Earth formed was the same.
It suggests that continental drift occurred in a northward direction.
It challenges the role of the Atlantic Ocean in shaping continental coastlines.
The word asserted in the passage is closest in meaning to
claimed
worried
repeated
doubted
Mesosaurus is mentioned in paragraph 3 to make which of the following points?
The presence of its fossils suggests that a land bridge once existed across the South Atlantic Ocean.
the fact that a reptilian species scavenged along the shoreline indicates that various species must have been there when reptiles arrived.
The dating of its fossils to the Permian period led Wegener to believe that this was the time when major movements of rocks and continents ended.
The lack of this species swimming ability supports the idea that the shores where its fossils were found must have been joined at one time.
What was the dilemma that Wegener solved?
Why prehistoric fossils occurred in deserts but not rainy regions
Whether sand and gravel were once part of ancient glaciers
How to explain great climatic variations occurring at the same time among various regions
Whether the overall temperature of Earth was once hotter or colder

Climatic changes such as changes in temperature, precipitation, humidity, or wind speed that are produced by urbanization involve all major surface conditions. Some of these changes are quite obvious and relatively easy to measure. Others are more subtle and sometimes difficult to measure. The amount of change in any of these elements, at any time, depends on several variables, including the extent of the urban complex, the nature of industry, site factors such as topography and proximity to water bodies, time of day, and existing weather conditions.
 The most studied and well-documented urban climatic effect is the urban heat island.  The term simply refers to the fact that temperatures within cities are generally higher than in rural areas.  The heat island is evident when temperature data are examined.  For example, the distribution of average minimum temperatures in the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area for the three-month winter period (December through February) over a five-year span, clearly represents a well-developed heat island. The warmest winter temperatures occurred in the heart of the city, while the suburbs and surrounding countryside experienced average minimum temperatures that were as much as 3.3C lower. Remember that these temperatures are averages, because on many clear, calm nights the temperature difference between the city center and the countryside was considerably greater, often 11C or more. Conversely, on many overcast or windy nights the temperature differential approached zero degrees.
The radical change in the surface that results when rural areas are transformed into cities is a significant cause of the urban heat island. First, the tall buildings and the concrete and asphalt of the city absorb and store greater quantities of solar radiation than do the vegetation and soil typical of rural areas. In addition, because the city surface is impermeable, the runoff of water following a rain is rapid, resulting in a severe reduction in the evaporation rate. Hence, heat that once would have been used to convert liquid water to a gas now goes to increase the surface temperature. At night, while both the city and the countryside cool by radiative losses, the stone-like surface of the city gradually releases the additional heat accumulated during the day, keeping the urban air warmer than that of the outlying areas.
A portion of the urban temperature rise must also be attributed to waste heat from sources such as home heating and air conditioning, power generation, industry, and transportation. Many studies have shown that the magnitude of human-generated energy in metropolitan areas is great when compared to the amount of energy received from the Sun at the surface. For example, investigations in Sheffield, England, and Berlin, Germany, showed that the annual heat production in those cities was equal to approximately one-third of that received from solar radiation. Another study of densely built-up Manhattan in New York City revealed that during the winter, the quantity of heat produced by combustion alone was 2  times greater than the amount of solar energy reaching the ground. In summer, the figure dropped to 1/6.
There are other, somewhat less influential, causes of the heat island. For example, the blanket of pollutants over a city contributes to the heat island by absorbing a portion of the upward-directed long-wave radiation emitted at the surface and re-emitting some of it back to the ground. A somewhat similar effect results from the complex three-dimensional structure of the city. The vertical walls of office buildings, stores, and apartments do not allow radiation to escape as readily as in outlying rural areas where surfaces are relatively flat. As the sides of these structures emit their stored heat, a portion is re-radiated between buildings rather than upward, and is therefore slowly dissipated. In addition to re-radiating the heat loss from the city, tall buildings also alter the flow of air. Because of the greater surface roughness, wind speeds within an urban area are reduced. Estimates from available records suggest a decrease on the order of about 25 percent from rural values. The lower wind speeds decrease the citys ventilation by inhibiting the movement of cooler outside air which, if allowed to penetrate, would reduce the higher temperatures of the city center.
 
The word proximity in the passage is closest in meaning to
distribution
contamination
exposure
closeness
What can be inferred from paragraph 2 about the phenomenon of the urban heat island?
It occurs in rural areas to the same extent as urban areas.
It is influenced by variations in weather.
It increases the cloud cover over the city.
It produces a lot of wind at night.
According to paragraph 2, temperatures in the city and the surrounding areas are likely to be about the same
during the months of December through February
when averaged over a five-year span
on clear, calm nights
on cloudy, windy nights
Which of the following is NOT mentioned in paragraph 3 as a contributing cause of urban heat islands?
The effects of tall buildings and hard surfaces
The effects of vegetation on soil
The rapid runoff of water
The slow loss of nighttime heat
What can be inferred from paragraph 3 about rainwater in rural areas as compared to urban areas?
The evaporation rate of rainwater in rural areas is greater than it is in urban areas.
The runoff of rainwater is more rapid in rural areas than it is in urban areas.
Rural areas require more rainwater in order to cool down than urban areas do.
Rural areas experience greater problems when rainwater evaporates than urban areas do.
What purpose does paragraph 4 serve in the larger discussion of temperatures within urban areas?
To argue that certain urban areas produce more waste heat than others
To examine the impact of solar radiation on temperatures in large urban areas
To show how human-generated energy contributes to the urban heat island effect
To point out the rate at which urban heat islands have increased over time
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Pollutants hanging over a city contribute to the urban heat island effect by forcing solar radiation directly upward from the surface of Earth.
Air pollution contributes to rising temperatures in cities by reflecting a certain amount of radiation it has absorbed from Earths surface first back to Earth.
Earths surface absorbs long-wave radiation that is emitted by polluted air in Earths atmosphere.
Earth sends some of the heat that it has absorbed into the air where it is then absorbed by pollutants.
According to paragraph 5, which of the following statements is true about air flowing through a city?
Its speed is comparable to that in the countryside.
The movement of air is reduced by urban buildings.
It allows the city to cool down thoroughly at night.
It penetrates most quickly in urban areas with the tallest buildings.

The European Mesolithic (roughly the period from 8000 B.C. to 2700 B.C.) testifies to a continuity in human culture from the times of the Ice Age.  This continuity, however, was based on continuous adjustment to environmental changes following the end of the last glacial period (about 12,500 years ago).  Three broad subdivisions within the northern Mesolithic are known in Scandinavia.  The Maglemose Period (75005700 B.C.) was a time of seasonal exploitation of rivers and lakes, combined with terrestrial hunting and foraging.  The sites from the Kongemose Period (57004600 B.C.) are mainly on the Baltic Sea coasts, along bays and near lagoons, where the people exploited both marine and terrestrial resources. Many Kongemose sites are somewhat larger than Maglemose ones. The Erteblle Period (46003200 B.C.) was the culmination of Mesolithic culture in southern Scandinavia.
By the Erteblle Period, the Scandinavians were occupying coastal settlements year-round and subsisting off a very wide range of food sources. These included forest game and waterfowl, shellfish, sea mammals, and both shallow-water and deepwater fish. There were smaller, seasonal coastal sites, too, for specific activities such as deepwater fishing, sealing, or hunting of migratory birds. One such site, the Aggersund site in Denmark, was occupied for short periods of time in the autumn, when the inhabitants collected oysters and hunted some game, especially migratory swans. Erteblle technology was far more elaborate than that of its Mesolithic predecessors; a wide variety of antler, bone, and wood tools for specialized purposes such as fowling and sea-mammal hunting were developed, including dugout canoes up to ten meters long.
With sedentary settlement comes evidence of greater social complexity in the use of cemeteries for burials and changes in burial practices. The trend toward more sedentary settlement, the cemeteries, and the occasional social differentiation revealed by elaborate burials are all reflections of an intensified use of resources among these relatively affluent hunter-gatherers of 3000 B.C. Mesolithic societies intensified the food quest by exploiting many more marine species, making productive use of migratory waterfowl and their breeding grounds, and collecting shellfish in enormous numbers. This intensification is also reflected in a much more elaborate and diverse technology, more exchange of goods and materials between neighbors, greater variety in settlement types, and a slowly rising population throughout southern Scandinavia. These phenomena may, in part, be a reflection of rising sea levels throughout the Mesolithic that flooded many cherished territories. There are signs, too, of regional variations in artifact forms and styles, indicative of cultural differences between people living in well-delineated territories and competing for resources.
Mesolithic cultures are much less well-defined elsewhere in Europe, partly because the climatic changes were less extreme than in southern Scandinavia and because there were fewer opportunities for coastal adaptation. In much of central Europe, settlement was confined to lakeside and riverside locations, widely separated from one another by dense forests. Many Mesolithic lakeside sites were located in transitional zones between different environments so that the inhabitants could return to a central base location, where for much of the year they lived close to predictable resources such as lake fish. However, they would exploit both forest game and other seasonal resources from satellite camps. For example, the archaeologist Michael Jochim believes that some groups lived during most of the year in camps along the Danube River in central Europe, moving to summer encampments on the shores of neighboring lakes. In areas like Spain, there appears to have been intensified exploitation of marine and forest resources. There was a trend nearly everywhere toward greater variety in the diet, with more attention being paid to less obvious foods and to those that require more complex processing methods than do game and other such resources.
Thus, in parts of Europe, there was a long-term trend among hunter-gatherer societies toward a more extensive exploitation of food resources, often within the context of a strategy that sought ways to minimize the impact of environmental uncertainty. In more favored southern Scandinavia, such societies achieved a new level of social complexity that was to become commonplace among later farming peoples, and this preadaptation proved an important catalyst for rapid economic and social change when farming did come to Europe.
 
What can be inferred from paragraph 1 about human life in Mesolithic Scandinavia?
People tended to live in smaller groups during the Erteblle Period than during earlier Mesolithic periods.
The areas where it was advantageous to live changed over time as a result of environmental changes.
Human groups were less affected by environmental change during the Maglemose Period than during the Kongemose Period.
During most of the Mesolithic, people were more dependent on terrestrial food sources than other food sources.
Why does the author mention the Aggersund site in Denmark and its brief periods of occupation?
To suggest that the supply of year-round food sources near earlier settlement sites had nearly disappeared
To give an example of a small, temporary coastal site that took advantage of seasonal food sources
To illustrate how small coastal settlements could not last as long as large forest settlements
To highlight the fact that none of the Denmark camps were able to be occupied year-round
Paragraph 2 suggests that before the Erteblle Period, hunting tools and other Mesolithictechnologies
were available only in small coastal sites
were developed mainly in Denmark
were made mainly from animal bones
were somewhat simple
The word exploiting in the passage is closest in meaning to
calling attention to
focusing on
taking advantage of
searching for
According to paragraph 3, the existence of cemeteries in Mesolithic Scandinavia is associated with
increased social complexity
problems in obtaining sufficient food
a dramatically increasing population
a trend toward reduced dependence on the food sources provided by hunter-gatherers
The phrase confined to in the passage is closest in meaning to
adapted to
limited to
expanded to
located next to
According to paragraph 4, how were Mesolithic societies in central Europe able to meet their food needs for much of the year?
By finding new opportunities for coastal adaptations wherever they could
By keeping their base camps in dense forests with plenty of forest game
By settling in areas that provided both predictable food resources and access to different kinds of environments
By hunting farther and farther from their central base camps each day
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Because of favorable conditions in southern Scandinavia and the social complexity of their societies, hunter-gatherer societies did not adapt to farming until economic change required it.
When farming came to Europe and became common, hunter-gatherer societies finally achieved high levels of social complexity.
Social complexity was common in the societies of southern Scandinavia but was less common in other areas where farming came later.
Hunter-gatherer societies in southern Scandinavia achieved a new level of social complexity, and this allowed them to quickly achieve economic and social change when farming was introduced.

Many aspects of the history of flowering plants (angiosperms) remain mysterious. Evidence of the earliest angiosperms comes from fossilized leaves, stems, fruits, pollen, and, very rarely, flowers. In addition, there has been much study of modern plant morphology (structure) and genetics in order to determine which living species might be most closely related to the ancient ancestors of angiosperms. Despite intensive efforts for over 200 years, scientists have still not reached consensus on which type of plant was the ancestor to the angiosperms, and when and where the angiosperms first evolved. Indeed, Charles Darwin himself called the origin of the flowering plants an abominable mystery.
What type of plant was the ancestor to the angiosperms? Most botanists now agree that the flowering plants are monophyletic in origin, meaning that they evolved from a common ancestor.  Some paleontologists have suggested that the common ancestor may have been a type of cycad (palmlike tropical plants).  Other paleontologists maintain that the angiosperms may have evolved from seed-bearing ferns.  Finally, analysis of the morphological traits of some primitive living plants suggests that the ancestor may have been related to the modern pines.  The question of angiosperm ancestry remains unresolved.
The time and place of the first appearance of flowering plants have long been a topic of great interest. There is good fossil evidence that early angiosperms, including a number resembling modern magnolias, were present in the Early Cretaceous geologic period (more than 100 million years ago). Angiosperms became increasingly abundant during this period. Between 100 million and 65 million years ago, a period known as the Late Cretaceous, angiosperms increased from less than 1 percent of flora (plant life) to well over 50 percent. Many of the modern plant families appeared during this time period. In the Early Tertiary period which followed, angiosperms increased to comprise 90 percent or more of Earths total flora. Where did these successful plants first originate and spread from?
Analysis of the fossil leaf structure and geographic distribution of the earliest Cretaceous angiosperms has led many biogeographers to conclude that they evolved in the tropics and then migrated poleward. It is known that angiosperms did not become dominant in the high latitudes until the Late Cretaceous. Paleontologists have recovered fossil angiosperm leaves, stems, and pollen from Early Cretaceous deposits in eastern South America and western Africa. These two continents were joined together as part of Gondwanaland, one of two supercontinents that existed at that time. The locations of these early angiosperm finds would have been close to the equator during the Early Cretaceous and are conformable with a model by which angiosperms spread from the tropics poleward.
Not all botanists agree with an African-South American center for the evolution and dispersal of the angiosperms, pointing out that many of the most primitive forms of flowering plants are found in the South Pacific, including portions of Fiji, New Caledonia, New Guinea, eastern Australia, and the Malay Archipelago. Recent genetic research has identified the rare tropical shrub Amborella as being the living plant most closely related to the ancient ancestor of all the angiosperms. This small shrub, which has tiny yellow-white flowers and red fruit, is found only on New Caledonia, a group of islands in the South Pacific. Many botanists conclude that the best explanation for the large numbers of primitive living angiosperms in the South Pacific region is that this is where the flowering plants first evolved and these modern species are relics of this early evolution. Comparisons of the DNA of Amborella and many hundreds of species of flowering plants suggest that the first angiosperm arose and the development of separate species occurred about 135 million years ago.
Recently discovered fossils complicate our understanding of the origin of the angiosperms even further. Paleontologists from China have found beautifully preserved fossils of an angiosperm plant, including flowers and seeds, in Jurassic period deposits from China. The site, which is about 130 million years old, is near modern Beijing. The new fossil plant found at the site is one of the oldest known angiosperms. The age of the fossils and the very primitive features of the flowers have led the discoverers to suggest that the earliest flowering plants may have evolved in northern Asia.
 
The phrase not reached consensus on in the passage is closest in meaning to
not formulated a theory about
not agreed on
not been able to explain
not found evidence for
According to paragraph 1, all of the following types of evidence have been important for studying the history of angiosperms EXCEPT:
fossils of angiosperm stems and leaves
knowledge of the structure of modern angiosperms
large collections of well-preserved angiosperm flowers
genetic studies of modern angiosperms
The word maintain in the passage is closest in meaning to
reply
assume
suspect
claim
According to paragraph 2, most botanists now believe which of the following about angiosperms?
The ancestor of todays angiosperms was most likely a palmlike tropical plant.
Todays angiosperms can be traced back to a single ancestor.
Angiosperms likely evolved from three very different plants.
Angiosperms share a common ancestor with modern pines.
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 3 about angiosperms during the Early Cretaceous?
They represented less than 1 percent of plant life.
Their numbers remained stable during this period.
They existed in forms that are very unlike plants living today.
They only rarely left traces in the fossil record.
Why does the author include the information that fossil angiosperm leaves, stems, and pollen have been found in places that were once joined together as part of Gondwanaland?
To provide support for the claim that angiosperms first appeared in the tropics
To explain how scientists have determined the geographical location of supercontinents during Earths early history
To provide evidence that angiosperms evolved in similar ways in different parts of the world
To challenge the idea that angiosperms spread toward the poles during the Cretaceous
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leaveout essential information.
Some botanists who agree with the idea of an African-South American center for the dispersal of angiosperms point to primitive South Pacific angiosperms as evidence.
Some botanists argue that the very primitive forms of angiosperms found in the South Pacific call into question the theory that angiosperm evolution began in Africa and South America.
Angiosperms in Fiji, New Caledonia, New Guinea, eastern Australia, and the Malay Archipelago are more primitive than angiosperms in other parts of the world.
Botanists disagree over whether the most primitive forms of living plants are located in parts of Africa and South America or in the South Pacific.
According to paragraph 6, which of the following is true of angiosperm fossils discovered in China?
They have made it even more challenging to understand the origin of angiosperms.
They contain flowers that appear modern for the age of the fossils.
They convinced most botanists that angiosperms did not originate in northern Asia.
They are not as old as angiosperm fossils discovered in the South Pacific.

The wet rice fields of Asia are the most productive of all preindustrial intensive agricultural systems.  As the term wet rice suggests, the method involves flooding the fields for most of the growing season.  In some areas the water comes entirely from the natural rainfall of the monsoons, but the water level often is controlled by artificial irrigation.  Most wet rice is, therefore, grown on the floodplains of rivers.  In parts of Southeast Asia, southern China, and the Himalayan fringes, wet rice is grown on terraced hillsides originally constructed centuries ago.
Perhaps the most remarkable feature of wet rice cultivation is the capability of a plot to yield a harvest year in the year out, with little or no need to be left uncultivated for extended periods in order to recover its fertility. Indeed, where the seasonal availability of water is adequate, the same plot may yield two and even three harvests in a single year, being under almost continuous cultivation. This capability has been attributed to four factors: the protection from erosion the water gives the soil, the high water table of the rivers floodplains that reduces the leaching of nutrients from the soil, the replacement of soil nutrients by the silt carried in the rivers flooding, and nitrogen fixation (the conversion of atmospheric nitrogen into forms usable by plants) from the blue-green algae that live in the floodwater. The chief benefit of wet rice--- its ability to grow in the same field year after year --- is then related to the practice of flooding the fields and allowing the water to remain throughout most of the maturation period.
Despite the advantages of their methods, wet rice farmers must solve problems relating to the management of water, because the proper supply of water at the proper time is some important for a good yield. It is more efficient if storage ponds or tanks, canals, ditches, and other improvements are held and managed communally, because less labor is required to construct and maintain them than if each family owned its own. Water may be stored in small lakes or ponds or captured and held in tanks until it is used to flood the fields. The water level must be controlled fairly precisely white the rice is growing: if it rises too high, the plants will be unable to photosynthesize; and if it falls too low, the benefits of having standing water in the fields will be reduced. Unless the land is naturally flat, the plots, therefore, must be leveled to keep the height of the water constant in different ares of the field. The water level must be controlled by low dikes, usually constructed of earth, which can be easily breached to drain the plot for the harvest.
Managing the supply of the water that is so critical in growing wet rice requires sophisticated organization, especially with respect to cooperative labor patterns and rights of access to both land and water. Each family may work its lands on its own, but who will construct and maintain public irrigation works? Who will decide when dikes, dams ditches, and tanks need to be repaired, and how will the labor to repair them be coordinated? The water used on the fields of one family is not available to other families. How shall the consumption of water be coordinated? Who will get how much water and when? How, in short, will use rights to water be determined?
In one example of organizing the allocation of water to the fields, the Sinhalese of the dry zone of Sri Lanka draw water from a collectively owned rain-fed reservoir constructed of earth. All of the cultivated land of a village is in a single area, below the reservoir. The entire field is laid out into diked plots of equal size. Each plot receives a fixed amount of water from the communal reservoir, though the number of families working a single plot varies: Poor families must share water rights of access to one plot with other families, whereas richer families have access to several plots. Assigning each plot (rather than each family) the same proportion of irrigation water reduces the chance that a given plot will receive insufficient moisture.
 
Paragraph 1 suggests which of the following about the artificial irrigation of wet rice?
It is used only in areas where there is little natural rainfall.
It is most easily accomplished when the rice fields are located on the floodplains or rivers.
It is considered one of the most important developments of industrial agriculture.
It was not yet in use when the terraced hillsides were originally constructed.
The phrase  attributed to in the passage is closest in meaning to
divided into
reduced
explained by
proven by
According to paragraph 2, the flooding of wet rice fields is responsible for each of the following benefits EXCEPT
reduced erosion
harvests that increase yearly in amount
the regular addition of nutrients to the soil
nitrogen fixation
What is the role of the last sentence of paragraph 2?
To apply the ideas of the paragraph to a new case
To summarize the ideas of the paragraph
To emphasize a surprising consequence of the ideas of the paragraph
To explain why the ideas of the paragraph are important
The word captured in the passage is closest in meaning to
trapped
transported
shared
cleaned
According to paragraph 3, uneven land must be leveled before its is suitable for wet rice growing because
less water is needed to flood every part of a field when the field is level
the height of water in which rice plants are growing must be kept constant
the water levels in the fields must be reduce for the harvest
draining the plots for the harvest is faster when the land is leveled
According to paragraphs 4, in wet rice areas all of the following are problems that require cooperation to solve EXCEPT
deciding how available water should be distributed among its different users.
organizing labor to repair water storage facilities
arranging for the construction of irrigation works
ensuring that enough workers are available to cultivate each plot
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information
Poor families who must share a plot have access to less water from the communal reservoir than do rich families who have their own plots.
Each plot receives the same amount of water from the communal reservoir regardless of the number of families who work that plot, which varies depending on the wealth.
Because each plot receives the same amount of water from the communal reservoir, poor families have access to just as much water for their plots as wealthy families do.
The amount of water each plot receives from the communal reservoir is fixed according to the wealth of the families who have access to that plot

In open grasslands there is no place for a large animal to hide.  Thus a watchful grazing animal will see the slight movement that betrays the presence of a predator long before it is close enough to launch an attack. It sounds as though the hunters (predators) stand no chance at all.  Unfortunately for the grazers, life is not so simple, however.  A grazing animal must lower its head and look at the ground to feed.  Its attention may be occupied for only a few seconds before it raises its head and resumes its watch while chewing the food it took, but hunters are patient and skillful and are concentrating intensely. Those few seconds provide time enough to advance a few steps and then freeze, body flattened against the ground. It may take hours, but eventually these repeated small advances will put the hunter within rangeclose enough to outrun its preyand the long time the hunt has taken will have been worthwhile, because the resulting feast will be highly nutritious.
Clearly the grazers are at a disadvantage, because while they eat they are vulnerable to attack. The hunters also have a weakness, however, and it is one that allows the grazers to survive. Hunters can attack only one prey animal at a time. This applies even to the predators that hunt as a team, such as lionesses, wolves, and hunting dogs. Their hunt involves running down or ambushing an individual. Teamwork allows them to hunt animals much bigger and stronger than themselves and to hunt more successfully, but it does not allow them to attack more than one individual at a time.
The grazers exploit this weakness by making it as difficult as they can for the predators to choose an individual as a target. They do not graze alone, scattered widely across the landscape, but together, as a herd. The approaching hunter sees not a solitary animal, but a crowd of animals, all of them moving, so they are constantly crossing and recrossing each others paths. No sooner does the hunter choose an individual than another animal has crossed in front of it and the target has disappeared into the herd. From the hunters point of view this is highly confusing behavioras, indeed, it is meant to be.
There is another advantage to the grazers: A herd is much more alert than a solitary animal. An animal has to relax its guard while it is taking food, but in a herd there are at any time some animals with their heads down, biting, and others, with their heads up, watching. What is more, those with their heads up are looking in different directions so that together they are alert to any movement anywhere on the landscape around them. There is no way for a hunter to approach a herd unobserved. When a member of the herd spots trouble, it starts to move away. Other members of the herd move with it and the entire herd starts to move. If the trouble is serious and close, the herd will run. The individual raising the alarm is simply protecting itself, but in doing so it is warning all of the others.
Herding is highly successful, provided members of the herd stay together in a tight bunch. The hunter moves with the herd, watching for an individual to wander away from the others. When that happens, it tries to move between that individual and the rest of the herd, preventing it from rejoining. Once it has done that the hunter has a good chance of making a kill. If the herd starts to run, a solitary hunter may abandon the chase, but a pack of wolves or hunting dogs will regard the running herd of animals as an opportunity and set off in pursuit. As the herd runs, one or two old or sick animals, or young animals that become separated from their mothers, may fall behind.
As soon as the hunter or hunters seize their prey, they lose interest in all other grazers since then they, too, must concentrate on eating, at which point the herd stops running, those who were left behind rejoin the group, and they all resume grazing.
 
According to paragraph 1, which of the following presents a serious difficulty for the predators that hunt animals grazing in grasslands?
It is difficult to find grazers in grasslands when they are feeding with their heads down.
Predators lack places to hide from prey in grasslands.
It is difficult for predators to outrun grazers on grasslands.
Grazers in open grasslands tend to be very large animals.
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 1 about grazing animals?
They spend significantly more time looking down at the ground than they do with their heads raised.
They tend to remain within a relatively small area for extended periods of time.
They are extremely difficult for predators to see as long as they remain motionless.
They can run significantly faster than most of their predators.
According to paragraph 2, what is an advantage to predators that hunt as a team?
A team can kill animals that are much bigger and stronger than any of the predators could take on by itself.
A team can ambush their prey without having to run them down as an individual predator has to do.
A team can attack more prey animals at one time than an individual predator could.
A team is less vulnerable to an aggressive response from grazers.
In paragraph 2, why does the author describe the hunting technique used by predators that hunt as a team?
To explain why predators that hunt as a team wait until grazers start eating to attack
To argue that species that hunt as a team do not have the same weakness as individual predators
To emphasize that even predators that hunt in groups cannot hunt and attack more than one prey at a time
To help explain why grazers are at a particular disadvantage with certain predatory animals
Which of the following is NOT mentioned in paragraph 4 as a way in which animals that graze as a herd benefit?
Some animals in the herd will be in a position to observe danger while others have their heads down.
Each animal in a herd tries to protect the others from danger.
As a herd, animals can observe the landscape in a variety of directions at once.
The movement of any animal away from potential trouble warns all of the other animals within the herd.
The word provided in the passage is closest in meaning to
if
because
unless
therefore
According to paragraph 5, any member of a herd is most at risk from predators when
it is very young
it becomes separated from the others
the herd includes relatively few old or sick animals
the herd begins to run
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
The hunter or hunters are interested only in seizing their prey and not in any of the rest of the grazers in the herd.
Because the hunters must concentrate on eating once they make a kill, the rest of the herd can then stop running and resume grazing.
Once the hunters finish eating their prey, they lose interest in the rest of the herd that was left behind.
Because they must also concentrate on eating, herd animals resume grazing as soon as the hunter or hunters seize their prey.

 In nineteenth-century America, practically everything that was built involved wood.Pine was especially attractive for building purposes.It is durable and strong, yet soft enough to be easily worked with even the simplest of hand tools.It also floats nicely on water, which allowed it to be transported to distant markets across the nation.The central and northern reaches of the Great Lakes statesMichigan, Wisconsin, and Minnesotaall contained extensive pine forests as well as many large rivers for floating logs into the Great Lakes, from where they were transported nationwide.
   By 1860, the settlement of the American West along with timber shortages in the East converged with ever-widening impact on the pine forests of the Great Lakes states. Over the next 30 years, lumbering became a full-fledged enterprise in Michigan, Wisconsin, and Minnesota. Newly formed lumbering corporations bought up huge tracts of pineland and set about systematically cutting the trees. Both the colonists and the later industrialists saw timber as a commodity, but the latter group adopted a far more thorough and calculating approach to removing trees. In this sense, what happened between 1860 and 1890 represented a significant break with the past. No longer were farmers in search of extra income the main source for shingles, firewood, and other wood products. By the 1870s, farmers and city dwellers alike purchased forest products from large manufacturing companies located in the Great Lakes states rather than chopping wood themselves or buying it locally.             
   The commercialization of lumbering was in part the product of technological change. The early, thick saw blades tended to waste a large quantity of wood, with perhaps as much as a third of the log left behind on the floor as sawdust or scrap. In the 1870s, however, the British-invented band saw, with its thinner blade, became standard issue in the Great Lakes states' lumber factories.Meanwhile, the rise of steam-powered mills streamlined production by allowing for the more efficient, centralized, and continuous cutting of lumber. Steam helped to automate a variety of tasks, from cutting to the carrying away of waste. Mills also employed steam to heat log ponds, preventing them from freezing and making possible year-round lumber production.             
   For industrial lumbering to succeed, a way had to be found to neutralize the effects of the seasons on production. Traditionally, cutting took place in the winter, when snow and ice made it easier to drag logs on sleds or sleighs to the banks of streams. Once the streams and lakes thawed, workers rafted the logs to mills, where they were cut into lumber in the summer. If nature did not cooperateif the winter proved dry and warm, if the spring thaw was delayedproduction would suffer. To counter the effects of climate on lumber production, loggers experimented with a variety of techniques for transporting trees out of the woods.  In the 1870s, loggers in the Great Lakes states began sprinkling water on sleigh roads, giving them an artificial ice coating to facilitate travel.  The ice reduced the friction and allowed workers to move larger and heavier loads.  
  But all the sprinkling in the world would not save a logger from the threat of a warm winter. Without snow the sleigh roads turned to mud. In the 1870s, a set of snowless winters left lumber companies to ponder ways of liberating themselves from the seasons. Railroads were one possibility.At first, the remoteness of the pine forests discouraged common carriers from laying track.But increasing lumber prices in the late 1870s combined with periodic warm, dry winters compelled loggers to turn to iron rails. By 1887, 89 logging railroads crisscrossed Michigan, transforming logging from a winter activity into a year-round one.             
  Once the logs arrived at a river, the trip downstream to a mill could be a long and tortuous one.Logjams (buildups of logs that prevent logs from moving downstream) were commonat times stretching for 10 milesand became even more frequent as pressure on the northern Midwest pinelands increased in the 1860s. To help keep the logs moving efficiently, barriers called booms (essentially a chain of floating logs) were constructed to control the direction of the timber. By the 1870s, lumber companies existed in all the major logging areas of the northern Midwest.             
 
The word "durable" in the passage is closest in meaning to
readily available
long lasting
dense
flexible
According to paragraph 1, all of the following characteristics of pine made it a desirable material for building in nineteenth-century America EXCEPT:
It was long lasting.
It was relatively easy to transport.
Its softness made it easy to work with.
It produced buildings that were especially attractive.
The word "commodity" in the passage is closest in meaning to
product
problem
opportunity
advantage
What can be inferred from paragraph 2 about timber in America before the year 1860?
Farmers of the American West earned most of their income by selling timber to newly arrived settlers.
Timber came primarily from farmers who wished to supplement their income.
Timber was much more expensive before the year 1860 because it was less readily available.
Timber came primarily from large manufacturing companies in the East.
Why does the author discuss the "British-invented band saw"?
To give an example of how steam power led to technological advancements
To help explain how the thickness of a saw blade determines how much wood is wasted
To explain how competition with other countries benefited the American lumber industry
To illustrate the impact of new technology on the lumber industry
The phrase "allowing for" in the passage is closest in meaning to
encouraging
introducing
making possible
emphasizing
All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 3 as resulting from the use of steam in the lumber industry EXCEPT:
Work became centralized, and many tasks were automated.
Lumber could be produced more efficiently and on a larger scale.
Waste materials could be re-used as fuel to power the lumber mills.
Lumber production could continue throughout the cold winter months.
The word "facilitate" in the passage is closest in meaning to
expand
ease
transform
permit
According to paragraph 4, how could a warm, dry winter interfere with lumber production?
Certain trees would become dry and yield low-quality lumber.
There would not be enough water in streams and lakes to raft the logs to mills.
It would be more difficult to transport logs to streams and lakes.
Rivers would not be full enough in the spring to power mills.
The word "remoteness" in the passage is closest in meaning to
decline
density
size
isolation
In paragraph 5, why does the author include the information that 89 logging railroads crisscrossed Michigan by 1887?
To argue that Michigan had replaced other Great Lakes states as the center of the lumbering industry
To provide evidence of the growing importance of logging railroads to the lumbering industry
To support the claim that Michigan winters had become more severe in the late 1800s than they had been earlier
To challenge the idea that climate discouraged the laying of track
According to paragraph 6, the construction of booms benefited the logging industry by
reducing the pressures placed on the northern Midwest pinelands in the 1860s
reducing the length of the downstream trip to a mill by as much as 10 miles
increasing the number of logs that could be floated down a river at a single time
allowing logs to move downstream more quickly and easily

  Thousands of years ago, in North America's past, all of its megafaunalarge mammals such as mammoths and giant bearsdisappeared. One proposed explanation for this event is that when the first Americans migrated over from Asia, they hunted the megafauna to extinction.These people, known as the Clovis society after a site where their distinctive spear points were first found, would have been able to use this food source to expand their population and fill the continent rapidly.Yet many scientists argue against this "Pleistocene overkill" hypothesis. Modern humans have certainly been capable of such drastic effects on animals, but could ancient people with little more than stone spears similarly have caused the extinction of numerous species of animals?Thirty-five genera or groups of species (and many individual species) suffered extinction in North America around 11,000 B.C., soon after the appearance and expansion of Paleo-lndians throughout the Americas (27 genera disappeared completely, and another 8 became locally extinct, surviving only outside North America).             
   Although the climate changed at the end of the Pleistocene, warming trends had happened before. A period of massive extinction of large mammals like that seen about 11,000 years ago had not occurred during the previous 400,000 years, despite these changes. The only apparently significant difference in the Americas 11,000 years ago was the presence of human hunters of these large mammals. Was this coincidence or cause-and-effect?
  We do not know.Ecologist Paul S. Martin has championed the model that associates the extinction of large mammals at the end of the Pleistocene with human predation.With researcher J. E. Mosimann, he has co-authored a work in which a computer model showed that in around 300 years, given the right conditions, a small influx of hunters into eastern Beringia 12,000 years ago could have spread across North America in a wave and wiped out game animals to feed their burgeoning population.             
  The researchers ran the model several ways, always beginning with a population of 100 humans in Edmonton, in Alberta, Canada, at 11,500 years ago.Assuming different initial North American big-game-animal populations (75-150 million animals) and different population growth rates for the human settlers (0.65%-3.5%), and varying kill rates, Mosimann and Martin derived figures of between 279 and 1,157 years from initial contact to big-game extinction.             
  Many scholars continue to support this scenario.For example, geologist Larry Agenbroad has mapped the locations of dated Clovis sites alongside the distribution of dated sites where the remains of wooly mammoths have been found in both archaeological and purely paleontological contexts.These distributions show remarkable synchronicity (occurrence at the same time).             
  There are, however, many problems with this model.Significantly, though a few sites are quite impressive, there really is very little archaeological evidence to support it.Writing in 1982, Martin himself admitted the paucity of evidence;for example, at that point, the remains of only 38 individual mammoths had been found at Clovis sites. In the years since, few additional mammoths have been added to the list;there are still fewer than 20 Clovis sites where the remains of one or more mammoths have been recovered, a minuscule proportion of the millions that necessarily would have had to have been slaughtered within the overkill scenario.             
  Though Martin claims the lack of evidence actually supports his modelthe evidence is sparse because the spread of humans and the extinction of animals occurred so quicklythis argument seems weak. And how could we ever disprove it?As archaeologist Donald Grayson points out, in other cases where extinction resulted from the quick spread of human huntersfor example, the extinction of the moa, the large flightless bird of New Zealandarchaeological evidence in the form of remains is abundant. Grayson has also shown that the evidence is not so clear that all or even most of the large herbivores in late Pleistocene America became extinct after the appearance of Clovis. Of the 35 extinct genera, only 8 can be confidently assigned an extinction date of between 12,000 and 10,000 years ago.Many of the older genera, Grayson argues, may have succumbed before 12,000 B.C., at least half a century before the Clovis showed up in the American West.             
 
The word "proposed" in the passage is closest in meaning to
accepted
obvious
debatable
suggested
The word "distinctive" in the passage is closest in meaning to
hidden
characteristic
scattered
rare
Why does the author compare "Modern humans" with "ancient people"?
To argue that modern people have continued to have drastic effects on animal species
To illustrate how people from different historical times treated animals differently
To question the idea that ancient people could have hunted the megafauna to extinction
To emphasize that modern people are more successful hunters than ancient people were
In using the word "coincidence" in the passage, the author refers to events that occurred
after a period of many years
subsequent to a prediction
from time to time
at the same time and by chance
According to paragraph 2, what suggests that human activity played a role in the extinction of mammals about 11,000 years ago?
Climate changes that would have favored human population expansion occurred at the time of the extinctions.
The presence of human hunters had caused animal extinctions in other time periods.
There was a pattern of climate change earlier than 11,000 years ago that had not caused animal extinctions.
Harmful climate changes 11,000 years ago would have required humans to hunt larger numbers of animals for food.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information
A computer model was designed to determine how long it would have taken for a small group of hunters to spread across North America.
A computer model showed that it was possible for a small group of hunters to spread across North America and kill off game animals in just 300 years.
According to a computer model, people coming into North America 12,000 years ago had to kill game animals in order to feed their population.
According to a computer model, about 12,000 years ago conditions enabled a small group of hunters to enter and cross North America in about 300 years.
Which of the following best describes the results of the research discussed in paragraph 4?
Scientists used mathematical models to show that most of the extinctions occurred in areas where humans had recently arrived.
Scientists established that the main population of North Americans who hunted lived in Canada during the time of the megafauna extinctions.
Scientists used numerical models to confirm that a small population of humans could have caused big-game extinctions in a relatively short period of time.
Scientists used statistics to prove beyond doubt the currently accepted view that human hunters were the main cause of the megafauna extinctions.
Which of the following statements about Larry Agenbroad's work is implied in the discussion in paragraph 5?
Agenbroad showed that Mosimann and Martin's estimates of the amount of time needed to drive big-game to extinction were correct.
Agenbroad's maps were the first to indicate the ages of the Clovis sites.
Agenbroad reinforced the idea that humans could have caused the extinctions.
Agenbroad's studies of wooly mammoths led to his discovery of Clovis sites.
The word "admitted" in the passage is closest in meaning to
accepted the truth of
was unaware of
was troubled by
called attention to
According to paragraph 6, which of the following statements challenges the view that hunting by humans caused the extinctions of North American megafauna?
The Clovis sites that contain the remains of mammoths were settled by humans long after the extinctions occurred.
Only a few of the Clovis sites are located near known mammoth habitats.
No archaeological evidence of extinctions has been found at Clovis sites since 1982.
The number of mammoth remains found at Clovis sites is smaller than would be expected if hunting by humans had caused the extinctions.
In paragraph7, why does the author mention that there is abundant archaeological evidence for the extinction of the New Zealand moa?
To show that extinctions occurred in areas other than North America.
To challenge Martin's claim that the lack of megafauna remains supports his model of the megafauna extinctions.
To identify a country where humans were highly skilled as hunters.
To help explain why it is unclear whether all large herbivores of late Pleistocene America became extinct after the appearance of Clovis.
Paragraph 7 suggests that Donald Grayson believes which of the following about the remains at Clovis sites and megafaunal extinctions?
The rapid rate of the spread of humans explains why the extinctions also occurred at a rapid rate.
The lack of evidence of human-caused extinctions is not surprising in view of the speed with which the extinctions occurred.
It is likely that more evidence will be found as dating methods improve.
If humans did contribute to the extinctions, much more evidence of that would have been found by now.

The arts of the Islamic book, such as calligraphy and decorative drawing, developed during A.D. 900 to 1500, and luxury books are some of the most characteristic examples of Islamic art produced in this period. This came about from two major developments: paper became common, replacing parchment as the major medium for writing, and rounded scripts were regularized and perfected so that they replaced the angular scripts of the previous period, which because of their angularity were uneven in height. Books became major vehicles for artistic expression, and the artists who produced them, notably calligraphers and painters, enjoyed high status, and their workshops were often sponsored by princes and their courts. Before A.D. 900, manuscripts of the Koran (the book containing the teachings of the Islamic religion) seem to have been the most common type of book produced and decorated, but after that date a wide range of books were produced for a broad spectrum of patrons. These continued to include, of course, manuscripts of the Koran, which every Muslim wanted to read, but scientific works, histories, romances, and epic and lyric poetry were also copied in fine handwriting and decorated with beautiful illustrations. Most were made for sale on the open market, and cities boasted special souks (markets) where books were bought and sold. The mosque of Marrakech in Morocco is known as the Kutubiyya, or Booksellers Mosque, after the adjacent market. Some of the most luxurious books were specific commissions made at the order of a particular prince and signed by the calligrapher and decorator.
 
Papermaking had been introduced to the Islamic lands from China in the eighth century. It has been said that Chinese papermakers were among the prisoners captured in a 
battle fought near Samarqand between the Chinese and the Muslims in 751, and the technique of papermaking  in which cellulose pulp extracted from any of several plants is first suspended in water, caught on a fine screen, and then dried into flexible sheets  slowly spread westward. Within fifty years, the government in Baghdad was using paper for documents. 
 Writing in ink on paper, unlike parchment, could not easily be erased, and therefore paper had the advantage that it was difficult to alter what was written on it. 
Papermaking spread quickly to Egypt  and eventually to Sicily and Spain  but it was several centuries before paper supplanted parchment for copies of the Koran, probably because of the conservative nature of religious art and its practitioners. In western Islamic lands, parchment continued to be used for manuscripts of the Koran throughout this period.

The introduction of paper spurred a conceptual revolution whose consequences have barely been explored. Although paper was never as cheap as it has become today, it was far less expensive than parchment, and therefore more people could afford to buy books, Paper is thinner than parchment, so more pages could be enclosed within a single volume. At first, paper was made in relatively small sheets that were pasted together, but by the beginning of the fourteenth century, very large sheets  as much as a meter across  were available. These large sheets meant that calligraphers and artists had more space on which to work. Paintings became more complicated, giving the artist greater opportunities to depict space or emotion. The increased availability of paper, particularly after 1250, encouraged people to develop systems of representation, such as architectural plans and drawings. This in turn allowed the easy transfer of artistic ideas and motifs over great distances from one medium to another, and in a different scale in ways that had been difficult, if not impossible, in the previous period.
Rounded styles of Arabic handwriting had long been used for correspondence and documents alongside the formal angular scripts used for inscriptions and manuscripts of the Koran. Around the year 900, Ibn Muqla, who was a secretary and vizier at the Abbasid court in Baghdad, developed a system of proportioned writing. He standardized the length of alif, the first letter of the Arabic alphabet, and then determined what the size and shape of all other letters should be, based on the alif. Eventually, six round forms of handwriting, composed of three pairs of big and little scripts known collectively as the Six Pens, became the standard repertory of every calligrapher.
 
Paragraph 1 makes all of the following points about Islamic books EXCEPT:
Books were an important form of artistic expression.
A wide variety of books with different styles and topics became available.
They were sold primarily near mosques.
Most books were intended for sale on the open market.
The word sponsored in the passage is closest in meaning to
visited
owned
praised
supported
The word adjacent in the passage is closest in meaning to
major
nearby
ancient
well-known
According to paragraph 1, before A.D. 900, books in the Islamic world
included a wide range of subjects
did not contain any calligraphy or decoration
used rounded scripts
were usually written on parchment
In paragraph 1, why does the author mention the fact that the mosque in Marrakech, Morocco, is known as the Booksellers Mosque
To cast doubt on the importance of souks in making books available to common people
To provide an example of a place where books were made at the order of a particular prince
To emphasize how influential and well known the book markets were
To demonstrate the need for religious texts in Islamic lands
The phrase extracted from in the passage is closest in meaning to
taken out of
produced using
discovered in
combined with
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
It was several centuries before papermaking techniques spread to faraway areas where parchment was popular and used widely in art.
Although papermaking came to Egypt quickly, it took much longer for paper to be used when copying the Koran, probably because of the conservative nature of religious art.
Papermaking spread beyond Egypt, Sicily, and Spain, but it was not widely used by artists for centuries, probably because of the conservative nature of art in those countries.
Paper replaced parchment in copies of the Koran, probably at the request of conservative practitioners in areas like Egypt, Sicily, and Spain.
In paragraphs 2 and 3, which of the following is NOT mentioned as an advantage of paper over parchment?
It was harder to erase or change what was written on paper.
More pages of paper could be bound in a single volume.
Paper could be produced in sheets of varying weights and thicknesses.
More people could buy books made of paper because it was cheaper.
Why does the author include the following information: At first, paper was made in relatively small sheets that were pasted together, but by the beginning of the fourteenth century, very large sheets  as much as a meter across  were available.?
To provide evidence that the development of papermaking techniques was very slow
To explain why paper was never as cheap as it has become today
To make the point that paper allowed artists to develop paintings that were more expressive and complex
To prove that paper was more popular with artists who used large sheets, than it was with book printers, who used smaller sheets
According to paragraph 3, the increased availability of paper and the development of systems of representation
encourage more people to make their own drawings
made the transfer of artistic ideas to distant people and places much easier
made architectural plans more complex and therefore harder to read
allowed artists to create paintings that were smaller in scale
According to paragraph 4, what did Ibn Muqla achieve around the year 900?
He modified a set of formal scripts known as the Six Pens into rounded scripts appropriate for correspondence.
He created a standardized set of rounded scripts proportional to the size of the first letter of the alphabet.
He promoted calligraphy as an art form and encouraged the use of rounded letters in religious texts.
He persuaded the court in Baghdad to use rounded styles instead of more angular scripts in their documents.
The phrase composed of in the passage is closest in meaning to
made up of
developed from
in addition to
similar to

   The creation of life requires a set of chemical elements for making the components of cells.  Life on Earth uses about 25 of the 92 naturally occurring chemical elements, although just 4 of these elementsoxygen, carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogenmake up about 96 percent of the mass of living organisms.  Thus, a first requirement for life might be the presence of most or all of the elements used by life.  
  Interestingly, this requirement can probably be met by almost any world. Scientists have determined that all chemical elements in the universe besides hydrogen and helium (and a trace amount of lithium) were produced by stars. These are known as heavy elements because they are heavier than hydrogen and helium. Although all of these heavy elements are quite rare compared to hydrogen and helium, they are found just about everywhere.             
  Heavy elements are continually being manufactured by stars and released into space by stellar deaths, so their amount compared to hydrogen and helium gradually rises with time. Heavy elements make up about 2 percent of the chemical content (by mass) of our solar system, the other 98 percent is hydrogen and helium. In some very old star systems, which formed before many heavy elements were produced, the heavy-element share may be less than 0.1 percent. Nevertheless, every star system studied has at least some amount of all the elements used by life.Moreover, when planetesimalssmall, solid objects formed in the early solar system that may accumulate to become planetscondense within a forming star system, they are inevitably made from heavy elements because the more common hydrogen and helium remain gaseous.Thus, planetesimals everywhere should contain the elements needed for life, which means that objects built from planetesimalsplanets, moons, asteroids, and comets-also contain these elements. The nature of solar-system formation explains why Earth contains all the elements needed for life, and it is why we expect these elements to be present on other worlds throughout our solar system, galaxy, and universe.             
  Note that this argument does not change, even if we allow for life very different from life on Earth. Life on Earth is carbon based, and most biologists believe that life elsewhere is likely to be carbon based as well. However, we cannot absolutely rule out the possibility of life with another chemical basis, such as silicon or nitrogen. The set of elements (or their relative proportions) used by life based on some other element might be somewhat different from that used by carbon-based life on Earth. But the elements are still products of stars and would still be present in planetesimals everywhere. No matter what kinds of life we are looking for, we are likely to find the necessary elements on almost every planet, moon, asteroid, and comet in the universe.             
  A somewhat stricter requirement is the presence of these elements in molecules that can be used as ready-made building blocks for life, just as early Earth probably had an organic soup of amino acids and other complex molecules. Earth's organic molecules likely came from some combination of three sources: chemical reactions in the atmosphere, chemical reactions near deep-sea vents in the oceans, and molecules carried to Earth by asteroids and comets. The first two sources can occur only on worlds with atmospheres or oceans, respectively. But the third source should have brought similar molecules to nearly all worlds in our solar system.             
  Studies of meteorites and comets suggest that organic molecules are widespread among both asteroids and comets. Because each body in the solar system was repeatedly struck by asteroids and comets during the period known as the heavy bombardment (about 4 billion years ago), each body should have received at least some organic molecules. However, these molecules tend to be destroyed by solar radiation on surfaces unprotected by atmospheres. Moreover, while these molecules might stay intact beneath the surface (as they evidently do on asteroids and comets), they probably cannot react with each other unless some kind of liquid or gas is available to move them about. Thus, if we limit our search to worlds on which organic molecules are likely to be involved in chemical reactions, we can probably rule out any world that lacks both an atmosphere and a surface or subsurface liquid medium, such as water.             
 
The word "components" in the passage is closest in meaning to
parts
bodies
combinations
characteristics
According to paragraphs 1 and 2, living cells contain which of the following?
All chemical elements in the universe except lithium
About 25 different elements
About 96 percent of all known elements
Ninety-two naturally occurring elements
Why does the author provide the information that "Heavy elements are continually being manufactured by stars and released into space by stellar deaths"?
To explain how it is that the elements required for life can be found everywhere.
To provide evidence that our solar system is relatively young.
To argue that some solar systems are more likely to support life than others.
To explain why heavy elements have greater mass than hydrogen and helium.
Paragraph 3 suggests that which of the following may be a difference between very old star systems and newer star systems?
Older star systems are likely to have fewer planets, moons, asteroids, and comets than newer star systems.
Newer star systems probably contain more hydrogen and helium than older star systems.
Newer star systems probably contain more heavy elements than older star systems.
The process of solar-system formation may have been fundamentally different in older star systems than in newer star systems.
The word "Nevertheless" in the passage is closest in meaning to
additionally
however
in particular
on the contrary
The word "inevitably" in the passage is closest in meaning to
typically
unsurprisingly
necessarily
naturally
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Planetesimals may remain in star systems when hydrogen and helium combine with less common heavier elements.
Planetesimals are composed of heavy elements because hydrogen and helium stay in the form of gases.
Planetesimals are small, solid objects that condense within a forming star system and may become planets.
When planetesimals accumulate to form planets, they inevitably contain gaseous as well as heavy elements.
According to paragraph 4, which of the following is true about possible life on other planets?
It cannot be based on silicon or nitrogen.
It could not survive on Earth.
It probably would not be made of elements produced by stars.
It is likely to have carbon as its chemical basis.
According to paragraph 5, all of the following are true of the organic molecules on early Earth EXCEPT:
Some of them were probably brought to Earth by asteroids or comets.
Some of them probably formed in the atmosphere and oceans.
They were probably significantly different from the organic molecules present on other planets in the solar system.
They included complex molecules.
The phrase widespread among is closest in meaning to
frequently present in
widely separated in
a significant part of
found throughout the bodies of
The word "intact" in the passage is closest in meaning to
buried
whole
confined
active
According to paragraph 6, why is life unlikely to be found on any planet that lacks both an atmosphere and a surface or subsurface liquid medium?
Organic molecules must be protected from solar radiation by a surface layer of liquid.
Planets that lack both of these features are probably too small to have been hit by many asteroids or comets carrying organic matter.
Organic molecules need a liquid or gaseous environment to bring them together so they can interact.
An atmosphere is needed to protect organic molecules from being destroyed by asteroids and comets.

Although literacy appeared independently in several parts of the prehistoric world, the earliest evidence of writing is the cuneiform Sumerian script on the clay tablets of ancient Mesopotamia, which, archaeological detective work has revealed, had its origins in the accounting practices of commercial activity. Researchers demonstrated that preliterate people, to keep track of the goods they produced and exchanged, created a system of accounting using clay tokens as symbolic representations of their products. Over many thousands of years, the symbols evolved through several stages of abstraction until they became wedge- shaped (cuneiform) signs on clay tablets, recognizable as writing.
The original tokens (circa 8500 B.C.E.) were three-dimensional solid shapestiny spheres, cones, disks, and cylinders. A debt of six units of grain and eight head of livestock, for example might have been represented by six conical and eight cylindrical tokens. To keep batches of tokens together, an innovation was introduced (circa 3250 B. C. E.) whereby they were sealed inside clay envelopes that could be broken open and counted when it came time for a debt to be repaid. But because the contents of the envelopes could easily be forgotten, two-dimensional representations of the three-dimensional tokens were impressed into the surface of the envelopes before they were sealed. Eventually, having two sets of equivalent symbolsthe internal tokens and external markingscame to seem redundant, so the tokens were eliminated (circa 3250-3100 B.C.E.), and only solid clay tablets with two-dimensional symbols were retained. Over time, the symbols became more numerous, varied, and abstract and came to represent more than trade commodities, evolving eventually into cuneiform writing.

The evolution of the symbolism is reflected in the archaeological record first of all by the increasing complexity of the tokens themselves. The earliest tokens, dating from about 10,000 to 6,000 years ago, were of only the simplest geometric shapes. But about 3500 B.C.E., more complex tokens came into common usage, including many naturalistic forms shaped like miniature tools, furniture, fruit, and humans. The earlier, plain tokens were counters for agricultural products, whereas the complex ones stood for finished products, such as bread, oil, perfume, wool, and rope, and for items produced in workshops, such as metal, bracelets, types of cloth, garments, mats, pieces of furniture, tools, and a variety of stone and pottery vessels. The signs marked on clay tablets likewise evolved from simple wedges, circles, ovals, and triangles based on the plain tokens to pictographs derived from the complex tokens.
Before this evidence came to light, the inventors of writing were assumed by researchers to have been an intellectual elite. Some, for example, hypothesized that writing emerged when members of the priestly caste agreed among themselves on written signs. But the association of the plain tokens with the first farmers and of the complex tokens with the first artisansand the fact that the token-and-envelope accounting system invariably represented only small-scale transactionstestifies to the relatively modest social status of the creators of writing.
And not only of literacy, but numeracy (the representation of quantitative concepts) as well. The evidence of the tokens provides further confirmation that mathematics originated in peoples desire to keep records of flocks and other goods. Another immensely significant step occurred around 3100 B.C.E., when Sumerian accountants extended the token-based signs to include the first real numerals.  Previously, units of grain had been represented by direct one-to-one correspondenceby repeating the token or symbol for a unit of grain the required number of times.  The accountants, however, devised numeral signs distinct from commodity signs, so that eighteen units of grain could be indicated by preceding a single grain symbol with a symbol denoting 18.  Their invention of abstract numerals and abstract counting was one of the most revolutionary advances in the history of mathematics. 
What was the social status of the anonymous accountants who produced this breakthrough? The immense volume of clay tablets unearthed in the ruins of the Sumerian temples where the accounts were kept suggests a social differentiation within the scribal class, with a virtual army of lower-ranking tabulators performing the monotonous job of tallying commodities. We can only speculate as to how high or low the inventors of true numerals were in the scribal hierarchy, but it stands to reason that this laborsaving innovation would have been the brainchild of the lower-ranking types whose drudgery is eased.
 
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Sumerian script, the earliest known form of writing among prehistoric writing systems, was first used on clay tablets for accounting purposes.
Although the earliest Sumerians engaged in commercial activity and practiced accounting, they were not as literate as people in other parts of the prehistoric world.
Archaeologists have discovered that literacy was developed in several parts of the world, including ancient Mesopotamia.
Archaeological detective work has revealed the commercial accounting practices of the Sumerians of ancient Mesopotamia and provided a written record of their intense commercial activity.
All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 2 as true of clay envelopes EXCEPT:
They contained batches of tokens.
They could be reused frequently.
They had markings on the outside.
They could be used to record debts.
According to paragraph 2, the first two-dimensional symbols were
pictures of commodities drawn on clay tablets
images sealed inside conical or cylindrical containers
numbers used for keeping track of clay envelopes
images of tokens pressed into the clay of envelopes
According to paragraph 2, why were tokens eliminated?
They were not numerous or varied enough to represent all of the trade commodities.
They were easily broken and then hard to count.
They were difficult to keep together in batches.
They were unnecessary when symbols were used on the surface of envelopes.
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 3 about the difference between earlier tokens and later tokens?
Later tokens were made of many different materials, but earlier ones were made only of clay.
Later tokens often looked like the commodities that they represented, but earlier ones did not.
Later tokens represented agricultural products, but earlier ones represented finished products.
Later tokens were based on pictographsbut earlier ones were based on naturalistic forms.
The word likewise" in the passage is closest in meaning to
probably
usually
similarly
apparently
The word Some in the passage refers to
evidence
inventors
researchers
intellectual elite
In paragraph 4, why does the author mention the association of tokens with farmers and artisans?
To provide examples of the types of commercial activity that existed in Sumerian society
To argue against the theory that writing was developed by an intellectual elite
To contrast the way farmers used tokens with the way artisans used tokens
To help explain why farmers and artisans had a relatively modest social status in Sumerian society
The word invariably in the passage is closest in meaning to
easily
accurately
always
soon
According to paragraph 5, all of the following statements about the development of numerals are true EXCEPT:
Numerals first developed around 3100 B.C.E.
Numerals were created to keep records of commodities.
The numeral 18 developed from the sign for grain.
Accountants introduced unique numeral signs for use with signs for commodities.
The word unearthed in the passage is closest in meaning to
discovered
protected
buried
forgotten
The word brainchild" in the passage is closest in meaning to
symbol
concern
pride
invention

On viewing the lush plant growth of a tropical rain forest, most people would conclude that the soil beneath it is rich in nutrients.   However, although rain forest soils are highly variable, they have in common the fact that abundant rainfall washes mineral nutrients out of them and into streams.   This process is known as leaching.   Because of rain leaching, most tropical rain forest soils have low to very low mineral nutrient content, in dramatic contrast to mineral-rich grassland soils.   Tropical forest soils also often contain particular types of clays that, unlike the mineral-binding clays of temperate forest soils, do not bind mineral ions well. Aluminum is the dominant cation (positively charged ion) present in tropical soils; but plants do not require this element, and it is moderately toxic to a wide range of plants. Aluminum also reduces the availability of phosphorus, an element in high demand by plants.
High moisture and temperatures speed the growth of soil microbes that decompose organic compounds, so tropical soils typically contain far lower amounts of organic materials (humus) than do other forest or grassland soils. Because organic compounds help loosen compact clay soils, hold water, and bind mineral nutrients, the relative lack of organic materials in tropical soils is deleterious to plants. Plant roots cannot penetrate far into hard clay soils, and during dry periods, the soil cannot hold enough water to supply plant needs. Because the concentration of dark-colored organic materials is low in tropical soils, they are often colored red or yellow by the presence of iron, aluminum: and manganese oxides; when dry, these soils become rock hard. The famous Cambodian temples of Angkor Wat, which have survived for many centuries, were constructed from blocks of such hard rain forest soils.
Given such poor soils, how can lush tropical forests exist? The answer is that the forest's minerals are held in its living biomassthe trees and other plants and the animals. In contrast to grasslands, where a large proportion of plant biomass is produced underground, that of tropical forests is nearly all aboveground. Dead leaves, branches, and other plant parts, as well as the wastes and bodies of rain forest animals, barely reach the forest floor before they are rapidly decayed by abundant decomposersbacterial and fungal. Minerals released by decay are quickly absorbed by multitudinous shallow, fine tree feeder roots and stored in plant tissues. Many tropical rain forest plants (like those in other forests) have mycorrhizal (fungus-root) partners whose delicate hyphae spread through great volumes of soil, from which they release and absorb minerals and ferry them back to the host plant in exchange for needed organic compounds. The fungal hyphae are able to absorb phosphorus that plant roots could not themselves obtain from the very dilute soil solutions, and fungal hyphae can transfer mineral nutrients from one forest plant to another. Consequently, tropical rain forests typically have what are known as closed nutrient systems, in which minerals are handed off from one organism to another with little leaking through to the soil. When mineral nutrients do not spend much time in the soil, they cannot be leached into streams. Closed nutrient systems have evolved in response to the leaching effects of heavy tropical rainfall. Evidence for this conclusion is that nutrient systems are more open in the richest tropical soils and tightest in the poorest soils.
The growth of organisms is dependent on the availability of nutrients, none of which is more important than nitrogen. Although there is an abundant supply of nitrogen in Earths atmosphere, it cannot be absorbed by plants unless it is fixed, or combined chemically with other elements to form nitrogen compounds. Nitrogen-fixing bacteria help tropical rain forest plants cope with the poor soils there by supplying them with needed nitrogen. Many species of tropical rain forest trees belong to the legume family, which is known for associations of nitrogen-fixing bacteria within root nodules. Also, cycads (a type of tropical plant that resembles a palm tree) produce special aboveground roots that harbor nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria. By growing above the ground, the roots are exposed to sunlight, which the cyanobacteria require for growth. Nitrogen fixation by free-living bacteria in tropical soils is also beneficial.
 
Select the TWO answer choices that, according to paragraph 1, help explain the relatively low mineral nutrient content of most tropical rain forest soils. To receive credit, you must select TWO answers
The water in the streams flowing through tropical rain forests generally has relatively low mineral content.
The range of plants that grow in tropical rain forests is so wide that almost every kind of mineral in the soil gets used up.
The clays contained in tropical rain forest soils do not bind mineral ions well.
Abundant rainfall causes minerals to leach out of the soil.
According to paragraph 1, one reason that the relatively high levels of aluminum in rain forest soils present a problem for plants is that aluminum
reduces the mineral-binding capacity of soils
is somewhat toxic to plants
makes too much phosphorus available to plants
is present as a positively charged ion in tropical rain forest soils
According to paragraph 2, clay soils that contain relatively low amounts of organic materials have all of the following disadvantages for plants EXCEPT
poor water retention
poor root penetrability
few soil microbes
low levels of mineral nutrients
Paragraph 2 supports the idea that, as compared with rain forest soils, grassland soils
contain a greater variety of soil microbes
contain less organic material
are able to hold more water
are generally lighter colored
Why does the author mention "Angkor Wat"?
To show that rain forest soils are essentially the same today as they were many centuries ago
To make the point that rain forest soils have certain advantages over other types of soils
To illustrate how colorful rain forest soils can sometimes be
To emphasize how hard rain forest soils can become
Paragraph 2 suggests the idea that compared with grassland soils, tropical rain forest soils have all of the following characteristics EXCEPT
soil microbes grow more slowly
contain lower amounts of organic materials
hold less water
contain iron, aluminum and manganese oxides
The word "multitudinous" in the passage is closest in meaning to
a great many
rapidly increasing
finely divided
extremely strong
The word Consequently in the passage is closest in meaning to
Nevertheless
However
As a result
In addition
According to paragraph 3, the main advantage of a closed nutrient system is that such a system
reduces the risk of minerals being lost through leaching
ensures that all organisms in the system receive an adequate supply of nutrients
increases the amount of nutrients that plant roots can absorb from soil solutions
increases the speed with which nutrients are returned to the soil
The word abundant in the passage is closest in meaning to
valuable
plentiful
usable
obvious
According to paragraph 4, why can getting enough nitrogen be a problem for plants?
Because most of Earths nitrogen is located in the atmosphere
Because plants can use the nitrogen they absorb only if they have previously absorbed certain other elements that are often scarce in poor soils
Because plants cannot absorb nitrogen that has not been chemically combined with other elements
Because plants have to compete with bacteria for available nitrogen in the soil
Paragraph 4 supports the idea that having aboveground roots benefits cycads in which of the following ways?
By increasing the growth rate of cycads' roots through exposure to sunlight
By increasing the supply of usable nitrogen available to cycads
By reducing the amount of nitrogen cycads require
By reducing cycadsdependence on nitrogen-fixing bacteria

In any investigation of the origins of art, attention focuses on the cave paintings created in Europe during the Paleolithic era (c. 40,000-10,000 years ago) such as those depicting bulls and other animals in the Lascaux cave in France.  Accepting that they are the best preserved and most visible signs of what was a global creative explosion, how do we start to explain their appearance? Instinctively, we may want to update the earliest human artists by assuming that they painted for the sheer joy of painting.  The philosophers of Classical Greece recognized it as a defining trait of humans to "delight in works of imitation"to enjoy the very act and triumph of representation.  If we were close to a real lion or snake, we might feel frightened.  But a well- executed picture of a lion or snake will give us pleasure.  Why suppose that our Paleolithic ancestors were any different?
This simple acceptance of art for art's sake has a certain appeal.  To think of Lascaux as a gallery allows it to be a sort of special viewing place where the handiwork of accomplished artists might be displayed.  Plausibly, daily existence in parts of Paleolithic Europe may not have been so hard, with an abundance of ready food and therefore the leisure time for art.  The problems with this explanation, however, are various.  In the first place, the proliferation of archaeological discoveriesand this includes some of the world's innumerable rock art sites that cannot be datedhas served to emphasize a remarkably limited repertoire of subjects.  The images that recur are those of animals.  Human figures are unusual, and when they do make an appearance, they are rarely done with the same attention to form accorded to the animals.  If Paleolithic artists were simply seeking to represent the beauty of the world around them, would they not have left a far greater range of picturesof trees, flowers, of the Sun and the stars?
A further question to the theory of art for art's sake is posed by the high incidence of Paleolithic images that appear not to be imitative of any reality whatsoever.  These are geometrical shapes or patterns consisting of dots or lines.  Such marks may be found isolated or repeated over a particular surface but also scattered across more recognizable forms.  A good example of this may be seen in the geologically spectacular grotto of Pche Merle, in the Lot region of France.  Here we encounter some favorite animals from the Paleolithic repertoirea pair of stout-bellied horses.  But over and around the horses' outlines are multiple dark spots, daubed in disregard for the otherwise naturalistic representation of animals.  What does such patterning imitate?  There is also the factor of location.  The caves of Lascaux might conceivably qualify as underground galleries, but many other paintings have been found in recesses totally unsuitable for any kind of viewingtight nooks and crannies that must have been awkward even for the artists to penetrate, let alone for anyone else wanting to see the art.
Finally, we may doubt the notion that the Upper Paleolithic period was a paradise in which food came readily, leaving humans ample time to amuse themselves with art.    For Europe it was still the Ice Age.    An estimate of the basic level of sustenance then necessary for human survival has been judged at 2200 calories per day.    This consideration, combined with the stark emphasis upon animals in the cave art, has persuaded some archaeologists that the primary motive behind Paleolithic images must lie with the primary activity of Paleolithic people: hunting.  
Hunting is a skill.  Tracking, stalking, chasing, and killing the prey are difficult, sometimes dangerous activities.  What if the process could be made easierby art? In the early decades of the twentieth century, Abb Henri Breuil argued that the cave paintings were all about sympathetic magic.  The artists strived diligently to make their animal images evocative and realistic because they were attempting to capture the spirit of their prey.  What could have prompted their studious attention to making such naturalistic, recognizable images? According to Breuil, the artists may have believed that if a hunter were able to make a true likeness of some animal, then that animal was virtually trapped.  Images, therefore, may have had the magical capacity to confer success or luck in the hunt.
 
According to paragraph 1, what is significant about the paintings in the Lascaux caves?
They provide accurate depictions of the bulls and other animals living in Paleolithic France.
They are the best available source of information about daily life during the Paleolithic era.
They are some of the best surviving examples of what was possibly one of the world's earliest artistic movements.
They are the only evidence of creative expression among Paleolithic human beings.
In paragraph 1, why does the author mention the views of the philosophers of Classical Greece?
To show how explanations about the appearance of cave painting during the Paleolithic have changed over time
To present a theory about humans and art that may be applicable to the Paleolithic era
To argue that Paleolithic paintings were created for the joy of painting, while Classical art was created to accurately represent the natural world
To demonstrate that the Greek philosophers were the first to accurately understand Paleolithic art
Paragraph 2 suggests that the Lascaux cave paintings could have been created as art for art's sake only if which of the following were true?
Caves were often used as viewing places for handiwork of all kinds.
Artists during the Paleolithic era were especially accomplished.
Paleolithic people were able to satisfy their basic needs fairly easily.
People in Paleolithic Europe learned about art from people living in other areas.
The word Plausibly in the passage is closest in meaning to
Similarly
Obviously
Ideally
Possibly
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
The limited variety in the subjects of rock art paintings has become increasingly evident in the many sites discovered.
The limited repertoire of subjects found in rock art has made it difficult for archaeologists to determine when each painting was created.
In the first place, there is little new archaeological information on the subject of rock art because of the limited number of recent discoveries.
Because many rock art sites cannot be dated, archaeologists have limited information about how rock art varied from period to period.
According to paragraph 2, which of the following is true about human figures as subjects of rock art?
Human figures almost always appear alone and never appear with animals.
Images of humans are both rarer and less accurately drawn than those of animals.
Some of the most beautiful images in Paleolithic rock art are of human figures.
There is more variety in how humans are depicted in cave art than in how animals are.
The word spectacular in the passage is closest in meaning to
unique
impressive
isolated
sheltered
In paragraph 3, why does the author include a description of a painting of horses from the grotto of Pche Merle?
To emphasize that stout-bellied horses were the most commonly found animals in that region at the time the painting was made
To provide evidence that Paleolithic artists created realistic images more often than they created paintings of dots or lines
To give an example of a cave painting that contains elements that do not imitate reality
To demonstrate that Paleolithic artists captured many details of the animals they painted, such as the spots on the horses' coats
According to paragraph 3, which of the following is true of the paintings located in the Lascaux caves?
They are all found in recesses that are difficult for viewers to reach
They fill every nook and cranny of a large underground gallery
Their location was probably more convenient for viewers than for the artists
They are easier to view than cave paintings at other locations.
The word diligently in the passage is closest in meaning to
with no success
with talent and skill
with mixed results
with persistence and hard work
According to paragraph 5, Breuil proposed which of the following theories about the purpose of cave paintings?
They were used to teach young hunters the skills they needed to hunt.
They were images created to help people forget about the dangers and difficulties of their daily lives.
They were used in magic rituals to increase people's understanding of the natural world.
They were meant to capture the spirits of animals and thus bring success in the hunt.
The word prompted in the passage is closest in meaning to
brought about
interfered with
increased
transformed

A large, swift stream or river can carry all sizes of particles, from clay to boulders. When the current slows down, its competence (how much it can carry) decreases and the stream deposits the largest particles in the streambed. If current velocity continues to decrease - as a flood wanes, for example - finer particles settle out on top of the large ones. Thus, a stream sorts its sediment according to size. A waning flood might deposit a layer of gravel, overlain by sand and finally topped by silt and clay. Streams also sort sediment in the downstream direction. Many mountain streams are choked with boulders and cobbles, but far downstream, their deltas are composed mainly of fine silt and clay. This downstream sorting is curious because stream velocity generally increases in the downstream direction. Competence increases with velocity, so a river should be able to transport larger particles than its tributaries carry. One explanation for downstream sorting is that abrasion wears away the boulders and cobbles to sand and silt as the sediment moves downstream over the years. Thus, only the fine sediment reaches the lower parts of most rivers.
A stream deposits its sediment in three environments: Alluvial fans and deltas form where stream gradient (angle of incline) suddenly decreases as a stream enters a flat plain, a lake, or the sea; floodplain deposits accumulate on a floodplain adjacent to the stream channel; and channel deposits form in the stream channel itself. Bars, which are elongated mounds of sediment, are transient features that form in the stream channel and on the banks. They commonly form in one year and erode the next. Rivers used for commercial navigation must be recharged frequently because bars shift from year to year. Imagine a winding stream. The water on the outside of the curve moves faster than the water on the inside. The stream erodes its outside bank because the current's inertia drives it into the outside bank. At the same time, the slower water on the inside point of the bend deposits sediment, forming a point bar. A mid-channel bar is a sandy and gravelly deposit that forms in the middle of a stream channel.
Most streams flow in a single channel. In contrast, a braided stream flows in many shallow, interconnecting channels. A braided stream forms where more sediment is supplied to a stream than it can carry. The stream dumps the excess sediment, forming mid-channel bars. The bars gradually fill a channel, forcing the stream to overflow its banks and erode new channels. As a result, a braided stream flows simultaneously in several channels and shifts back and forth across its floodplain. Braided streams are common in both deserts and glacial environments because both produce abundant sediment. A desert yields large amounts of sediment because it has little or no vegetation to prevent erosion. Glaciers grind bedrock into fine sediment, which is carried by streams flowing from the melting ice. If a steep mountain stream flows onto a flat plain, its gradient and velocity decrease sharply. As a result, it deposits most of its sediment in a fan-shaped mound called an alluvial fan. Alluvial fans are common in many arid and semiarid mountainous regions.
A stream also slows abruptly where it enters the still water of a lake or ocean. The sediment settles out to form a nearly flat landform called a delta. Part of the delta lies above water level, and the remainder lies slightly below water level. Deltas are commonly fan-shaped, resembling the Greek letter "delta" (). Both deltas and alluvial fans change rapidly. Sediment fills channels (waterways), which are then abandoned while new channels develop as in a braided stream. As a result, a stream feeding a delta or fan splits into many channels called distributaries. A large delta may spread out in this manner until it covers thousands of square kilometers.   Most fans, however, are much smaller, covering a fraction of a square kilometer to a few square kilometers.   The Mississippi River has flowed through seven different delta channels during the past 5,000 to 6,000 years.   But in recent years, engineers have built great systems of levees (retaining walls) in attempts to stabilize the channels.  
 
The word "curious" in the passage is closest in meaning to
strange
rapid
seasonal
essential 
According to paragraph 1, the competence of a stream increases as
downstream sorting decreases
flooding wanes
the speed of the current increases
the size of particles increases
According to paragraph 1, all of the following are true of stream sorting EXCEPT
Most of the particles in mountain streams pile up behind boulders and cobbles
When particles of different sizes settle in a place, the smaller ones sit atop the larger ones.
There are generally more large particles upstream than downstream in a river.
In some situations, downstream particles are created from rocks that eroded as they traveled downstream.
The word "accumulate" in the passage is closest in meaning to
begin
appear
build up
spread
According to paragraph 2, which of the following is true about bars in streams?
They start forming in the stream channel and then expand over the banks.
They seldom form in rivers that are used for commercial navigation.
They tend to grow longer each year.
They often last no more than a year.
Why does the author ask the reader to "Imagine a winding stream"?
To explain how the presence of bars changes the speed and direction of water flow in a stream
To explain why bars are more common than alluvial fans or other types of sediment deposits
To illustrate the particular difficulties that commercial navigation faces on many rivers
To help explain how point bars are formed
According to paragraph 3, all of the following are true of braided streams EXCEPT
They shift back and forth on the floodplain as some of their channels fill with sediment and new ones are formed
They carry sediments that tend to be very similar in size.
They sometimes have mid-channel bars.
Some of their channels are created as a result of the overflow of other channels.
Why does the author include the information that "Glaciers grind bedrock into fine sediment, which is carried by streams flowing from the melting ice"?
To give a reason why heavily sedimented braided streams are common in glacial environment
To explain why some mountain streams deposit most of their sediment in a fan-shaped mound
To identify the most common source of sediment in arid and semiarid mountainous regions
To help explain why glacial sediment decreases the gradient and velocity of steep mountain streams
The word "simultaneously" in the passage is closest in meaning to
in many directions
on the surface
at the same time
in a straight line
The word "abruptly" in the passage is closest in meaning to
noticeably
gradually
suddenly
slightly
According to paragraph 4, what is true about river deltas?
They alternate between periods of spreading out and periods of getting smaller
They have both active channels and channels that have been blocked by sediment.
They are typically formed by rivers that are braided before they reach the delta area.
They are much larger when formed in a still lake than when formed in the ocean.
According to paragraph 4, what are engineers trying to accomplish in the Mississippi delta?
To expand the channels into which the river flows
To keep the river flowing in the existing channels
To control the amount of sediment the river brings to the delta
To increase the part of the delta that lies above water level

In the archaeological record of the Natufian period, from about 12,500 to 10,200 years ago, in the part of the Middle East known as the Levant - roughly east of the Mediterranean and north of the Arabian Peninsula - we see clear evidence of agricultural origins. The stone tools of the Natufians included many sickle-shaped cutting blades that show a pattern of wear characteristic of cereal harvesting. Also, querns (hand mills) and other stone tools used for processing grain occur in abundance at Natufian sites, and many such tools show signs of long, intensive use. Along with the sickle blades are many grinding stones, primarily mortars and pestles of limestone or basalt. There is also evidence that these heavy grinding stones were transported over long distances, more than 30 kilometers in some cases, and this is not something known to have been done by people of preceding periods. Fishhooks and weights for sinking fishing nets attest to the growing importance of fish in the diet in some areas. Stone vessels indicate an increased need for containers, but there is no evidence of Natufian clay working or pottery. Studies of the teeth of Natufians also strongly suggest that these people specialized in collecting cereals and may have been cultivating them and in the process of domesticating them, but they were also still hunter-foragers who intensively hunted gazelle and deer in more lush areas and wild goats and equids in more arid zones.
The Natufians had a different settlement pattern from that of their predecessors. Some of their base camps were far larger (over 1,000 square meters) than any of those belonging to earlier periods, and they may have lived in some of these camps for half the year or even more. In some of the camps, people made foundations and other architectural elements out of limestone blocks. Trade in shell, obsidian, and other commodities seems to have been on the rise, and anthropologists suspect that the exchange of perishables (such as skins, foodstuffs) and salt was also on the increase. With the growing importance of wild cereals in the diet, salt probably became for the first time a near necessity: people who eat a lot of meat get many essential salts from this diet, but diets based on cereals can be deficient in salts. Salt was probably also important as a food preservative in early villages.
As always, there is more to a major cultural change than simply a shift in economics. The Natufians made (and presumably wore) beads and pendants in many materials, including gemstones and marine shells that had to be imported, and it is possible that this ornamentation actually reflects a growing sense of ethnic identity and perhaps some differences in personal and group status. Cleverly carved figurines of animals, women, and other subjects occur in many sites, and Natufian period cave paintings have been found in Anatolia, Syria, and Iran.   More than 400 Natufian burials have been found, most of them simple graves set in house floors.   As archaeologist Belfer-Cohen notes, these burials may reflect an ancestor cult and a growing sense of community emotional ties and attachment to a particular place, and toward the end of the Natufian period, people in this area were making a strict separation between living quarters and burial grounds.   In contrast with the Pleistocene cultures of the Levant, Natufian culture appears to have experienced considerable social change. 
The question of why the Natufians differed from their predecessors in these and other ways and why they made these first steps toward farming as a way of life remains unclear. There were climate changes, of course, and growing aridity and rising population densities may have forced them to intensify the exploitation of cereals, which in turn might have stimulated the development of sickles and other tools and the permanent communities that make agriculture efficient. But precisely how these factors interacted with others at play is poorly understood.
 
All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 1 as evidence that the Natufians may have engaged in the growing and processing of cereals and grains EXCEPT
tools with a specific pattern of wear
the widespread presence of grinding stones
the presence of clay containers
results from the analysis of Natufian teeth
Why does the author say that "many such tools show signs of long, intensive use" in connection with Natufian agriculture?
To argue that the Natufian people consumed grains long before they included fish in their diet
To suggest that Natufian people could not replace their tools frequently because they had to travel very long distances to find grinding stones
To illustrate the sophistication of the Natufians in the design of stone tools
To support the claim that the archaeological record of the Natufian period shows clear evidence of agricultural origins
The phrase "attest to" in the passage is closest in meaning to
symbolize
provide evidence of
are predictive of
coincide with
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Studies of the teeth of Natufians suggest the importance of cereals in their culture although they still hunted and foraged.
The Natufians specialized in collecting cereals and may have been in the process of domesticating certain animals.
Studies of the teeth of Natufians suggest that these people became hunter-foragers after they began domesticating cereals.
The Natufians diet consisted mostly of cereals and lacked sufficient meat.
Paragraph 2 suggests that compared with their predecessors, the Natufians
had smaller camps
had more permanent settlements
engaged in trade less often
had more meat in their diets
The phrase "be deficient in" in the passage is closest in meaning to
consist mainly of
be balanced by
not have enough
have adequate
The word "preservative" in the passage is closest in meaning to
something that adds flavor to food
something that adds nutritional value to food
something that keeps food fresh
something that increases the trade value of food
According to paragraph 2, the abundance of wild cereals in the Natufian diet probably meant that the Natufians
had to move their settlements more often
needed to supplement their diets with salt
found it easy to store their food supplies
no longer needed meat to provide essential minerals
The word reflects" in the passage is closest in meaning to
indicates
causes
hides
prevents
The word "ties" in the passage is closest in meaning to
values
experiences
influences
connections
All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 3 as part of the cultural change experienced by the Natufians EXCEPT
Technological advances
Personal ornamentation
Cave painting
Community burial sites
According to paragraph 4, which of the following may have helped push the Natufians toward farming as a way of life?
At the same time as the Natufian population was increasing, the climate was becoming less hospitable.
The development of sickles and other tools made it possible for Natufians to exploit new kinds of cereals.
The climate changed during the Natufian period and produced conditions favorable to growing cereals.
Increasing competition from neighboring populations may have forced Natufians to grow cereals more intensively.

The centralized dynasties that ruled ancient China were a product of the terrain and climate of the Asian continent. China is isolated from the rest of the Eastern hemisphere by formidable natural barriers of mountains on the west and southwest as well as the Gobi Desert on the north. To the east lies the Pacific Ocean. Although Chinas separation was not totaltrade goods, people, and ideas moved back and forth between China, India, arid Central Asia in many respects its development was distinctive.
In its formative years, Chinese civilization had been influenced by the contributing factors of the Yellow River region, the land of the loess. It is generally understood that the river, running through a vast area where the fine and porous soil accounts for the large silt content in its current, has a constant tendency to clog its own course and cause dikes to break and enormous inundations to occur. The problem cannot be dealt with locally.  This predicament has a historical origin that can be traced at least to the Spring and Autumn period (722481 B.C.), when in 652 B.C. Duke Huan of Qi convened his league of states.  A mutual pledge by all participants is recorded in various sources as not to execute improper dikes and not to hinder the water flow.  The stone inscriptions of his own achievements erected by the first emperor of the Qin dynasty (221207 B.C.) are reproduced in The Records of History.  One of the meritorious deeds that he credited to himself was the neutralization of the barriers that obstructed water flows. These and other references are evidence that Chinas political unification, achieved in the B.C. era, had come under the pressing demand for a coordinated effort in dealing with the flood problem, which, over and above technical considerations, has remained in force for the past 2,000 years.
A second factor compelling China to proceed to an early national unification and to follow it with political centralization was the effect of monsoon rain on agriculture. The summer monsoon in China comes from the direction of the Philippine Sea. It by itself does not give rain. The moisture in the air current depends upon winds blowing from west to east and northeast, lifting it to an altitude to be cooled; only then does rain come down from condensation. This climatic arrangement subjects agricultural crops of the nation to the synchronization of two sets of variables. When the two kinds of currents miss each other, drought sets in. When they repeatedly converge over a specific area, flood and inundation are the inevitable result. It is not uncommon for lack of rain and too much rain simultaneously to victimize two or more parts of China. Only an enormous empire in control of vast resources can deal with the situation. The requirement imposed by the power of nature was felt, too, during the B.C. era. In one ancient text we read many stories about wars between the principalities during times of natural disaster. The scholar Yao Shanyu, working from ancient summaries, calls attention to the fact that in the 2,117 years under study, 1,621 floods and 1,392 droughts caused damage serious enough to be reported by the imperial courts.
Further ruling out the possibility of a decentralized China was the potential threat of nomads. The traditional line of defense that China erected in the north along the steppea vast grass-covered plaincustomarily referred to as the Great Wall,was by no means fixed. The territories north and west of the Great Wall, having an annual rainfall of less than fifteen inches and therefore inadequate for cultivation, remained a grazing ground for the nomads. In times of bad weather and in periods of Chinas disunity, these nomads had a tendency to execute large-scale invasions. This was a problem whose cause was so deeply rooted in geography that the Chinese were not able to solve it merely through military offensives. Long-term experience taught them to put the regional and local government under a strong center, allowing national defense to dictate a degree of homogeneity and uniformity in order to survive.
 
According to paragraph 2, how does silt affect the Yellow River?
The large amount of silt causes the river to dry up.
The buildup of silt blocks the flow of water.
The silt blows across the river into vast areas.
The flow of silt damages the soil around the river.
The word executein the passage is closest in meaning to
move
produce
design
include
Why does the author mention Duke Huanand the first emperor of the Qin dynastyin the passage?
To question the accuracy of the available historical evidence about ancient China
To contrast the methods these rulers used to control water flow
To indicate the efficiency of laws in ancient China
To provide evidence for a claim made about the development of Chinese political unification
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Historical references show that for 2,000 years flooding has continued, despite coordinated efforts of government agencies.
Evidence shows that centralized political organization was necessary to deal with vast flooding problems, which still occur in modern times.
The floods that are referred to in historical documents have weakened the politicalunification of China for the past 2,000 years.
As shown in historical records, political unification of China was achieved despiteflood problems, which have taken 2,000 years to overcome.
The word inevitablein the passage is closest in meaning to
certain
common
unfortunate
additional
Paragraph 3 supports which of the following statements about the 2,117 years studied by Yao Shanyu?
Extensive documentation shows that both flooding and droughts frequently concerned the leaders of the nation.
During this period, droughts caused more serious damage than floods did.
Natural disasters occurred more frequently in the B.C. era than in modern times.
Ancient summaries contained inaccurate information about natural disasters.
According to paragraph 4,what was one drawback of China's traditional line of defense?
It was built by a decentralized Chinese state.
It did not always protect the land from invasion.
It was erected in the northernmost area of the country.
It used up much cultivated land.
According to paragraph 4, nomadic invasions of China occurred during periods of bad weather and
large-scale crop failures
sudden population increase within nomad groups
disorganization of government
physical breakdown of the Great Wall

The city of Memphis, located on the Nile near the modern city of Cairo, was founded around 3100 B.C. as the first capital of a recently united Egypt. The choice of Memphis by Egypt's first kings reflects the site's strategic importance. First, and most obvious, the apex of the Nile River delta was a politically opportune location for the state's administrative center, standing between the united lands of Upper and Lower Egypt and offering ready access to both parts of the country. The older predynastic (pre-3100 B.C.) centers of power, This and Hierakonpolis, were too remote from the vast expanse of the delta, which had been incorporated into the unified state. Only a city within easy reach of both the Nile valley to the south and the more spread out, difficult terrain to the north could provide the necessary political control that the rulers of early dynastic Egypt (roughly 3000-2600 B.C.) required.
  The region of Memphis must have also served as an important node for transport and communications, even before the unification of Egypt.   The region probably acted as a conduit for much, if not all, of the river-based trade between northern and southern Egypt.   Moreover, commodities (such as wine, precious oils, and metals) imported from the Near East by the royal courts of predynastic Upper Egypt would have been channeled through the Memphis region on their way south.  In short, therefore, the site of Memphis offered the rulers of the Early Dynastic Period an ideal location for controlling internal trade within their realm, an essential requirement for a state-directed economy that depended on the movement of goods.
Equally important for the national administration was the ability to control communications within Egypt. The Nile provided the easiest and quickest artery of communication and the national capital was, again, ideally located in this respect. Recent geological surveys of the Memphis region have revealed much about its topography in ancient times. It appears that the location of Memphis may have been even more advantageous for controlling trade, transport, and communications than was previously appreciated. Surveys and drill cores have shown that the level of the Nile floodplain has steadily risen over the last five millenniums. When the floodplain was much lower, as it would have been in predynastic and early dynastic times, the outwash fans (fan-shaped deposits of sediments) of various wadis (stream-beds or channels that carry water only during rainy periods) would have been much more prominent features on the east bank. The fan associated with the Wadi Hof extended a significant way into the Nile floodplain, forming a constriction in the vicinity of Memphis. The valley may have narrowed at this point to a mere three kilometers, making it the ideal place for controlling river traffic.
Furthermore, the Memphis region seems to have been favorably located for the control not only of river-based trade but also of desert trade routes. The two outwash fans in the area gave access to the extensive wadi systems of the eastern desert. In predynastic times, the Wadi Digla may have served as a trade route between the Memphis region and the Near East, to judge from the unusual concentration of foreign artifacts found in the predynastic settlement of Maadi. Access to, and control of, trade routes between Egypt and the Near East seems to have been a preoccupation of Egypts rulers during the period of state formation. The desire to monopolize foreign trade may have been one of the primary factors behind the political unification of Egypt. The foundation of the national capital at the junction of an important trade route with the Nile valley is not likely to have been accidental. Moreover, the Wadis Hof and Digla provided the Memphis region with accessible desert pasturage. As was the case with the cities of Hierakonpolis and Elkab, the combination within the same area of both desert pasturage and alluvial arable land (land suitable for growing crops) was a particularly attractive one for early settlement; this combination no doubt contributed to the prosperity of the Memphis region from early predynastic times.
 
The word "vast" in the passage is closest in meaning to
fertile
huge
unique
irregular
According to paragraph 1, why was Memphis a better choice for the capital of a united Egypt than either This or Hierakonpolis?
Memphis was in a better location for maintaining administrative control.
Memphis had long been a regional administrative center by the time Egypt was united.
This and Hierakonpolis had never actually been incorporated into the unified state.
Egyptian rulers had failed to keep political control over This and Hierakonpolis in predynastic times.
It can be inferred from paragraph 1 that one consequence of the unification of Egypt was
the reduction of the strategic importance of older centers of power
the opportunity for the recently united Egypt to become economically self-sufficient
the increase in political tensions between the rulers of Upper and Lower Egypt
the reduction of Egypt's dependence upon the Nile for trade and communications
Which of the following best describes how paragraph 1 is organized?
Two simultaneous developments are described, as well as the reasons why neither one would have occurred without the other.
A hypothesis is presented, and then points in favor of that hypothesis as well as points against it are discussed.
A major event is described, and then the most obvious effects of that event are presented.
A decision is described, and then one likely motivation for that decision is presented.
According to paragraph 2, when did Egypt import goods from the Near East?
Once internal trade was fully controlled from Memphis
Not until early dynastic Egypt established its state-directed economy
As early as predynastic times
Only when local supplies of those goods had been completely used up
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Thus in Memphis, the rulers of the Early Dynastic Period were ideally placed to control internal trade, which they had to do in order to run their economy.
Therefore the rulers of the Early Dynastic Period thought Memphis was the ideal location for trade with nearby countries.
In short, a state-directed economy like that of the Early Dynastic Period requires choosing a single location to which goods can be moved-Memphis, in this case.
In sum, then, a state-directed economy first developed during Egypt's Early Dynastic Period because Memphis was an ideal location for controlling trade.
The word "appreciated" in the passage is closest in meaning to
proposed
understood
approved
expected
According to paragraph 3, recent research into the topography of the Memphis region in ancient times suggests which of the following?
The level of the Nile floodplains was much higher in predynastic and dynastic times than in later times.
The sediment deposits of wadis were not as noticeable in predynastic and dynastic times than in later times.
The Nile valley at the point of Memphis was narrower in predynastic and dynastic times than it was in later times.
Frequent rainy periods may have caused a significant reduction of trade traffic during the predynastic and dynastic times.
The word "vicinity" in the passage is closest in meaning to
center
fields
city
surrounding area
According to paragraph 4, which of the following is NOT a reason Memphis was chosen as the capital of a united Egypt?
It was at the junction of a major trade route with the Nile valley.
It was near land that could be used for animal grazing and for growing crops.
The nearby outwash fans led into wadis that could be used as desert trade routes.
Since foreign traders had settled in nearby Maadi, trade between the two cities could be established.
The phrase "to have been accidental" in the passage is closest in meaning to
to have gone wrong
to have been helpful
to have occurred by chance
to have made a difference
In paragraph 4, why does the author mention the cities of Hierakonpolis and Elkab?
To give an indication of the level of prosperity that Memphis is thought to have enjoyed from its earliest days
To compare the Memphis region to them in terms of their similar combinations of characteristics providing advantages for early settlement
To identify the models that the founders of Memphis followed in laying out the national capital
To suggest that the combination of desert pasturage and alluvial arable land in the same area was very common

A fluid is a substance, such as a liquid or gas, in which the component particles (usually molecules) can move past one another. Fluids flow easily and conform to the shape of their containers. The geologic processes related to the movement of fluids on a planet's surface can completely resurface a planet many times. These processes derive their energy from the Sun and the gravitational forces of the planet itself. As these fluids interact with surface materials, they move particles about or react chemically with them to modify or produce materials. On a solid planet with a hydrosphere and an atmosphere, only a tiny fraction of the planetary mass flows as surface fluids. Yet the movements of these fluids can drastically alter a planet. Consider Venus and Earth, both terrestrial planets with atmospheres.
Venus and Earth are commonly regarded as twin planets but not identical twins. They are about the same size, are composed of roughly the same mix of materials, and may have been comparably endowed at their beginning with carbon dioxide and water. However, the twins evolved differently largely because of differences in their distance from the Sun. With a significant amount of internal heat, Venus may continue to be geologically active with volcanoes, rifting, and folding.   However, it lacks any sign of a hydrologic system (water circulation and distribution): there are no streams, lakes oceans or glaciers.   Space probes suggest that Venus may have started with as much water as Earth, but it was unable to keep its water in liquid form.   Because Venus receives more heat from the Sun, water released from the interior evaporated and rose to the upper atmosphere where the Sun's ultraviolet rays broke the molecules apart.  Much of the freed hydrogen escaped into space, and Venus lost its water. Without water, Venus became less and less like Earth and kept an atmosphere filled with carbon dioxide. The carbon dioxide acts as a blanket, creating an intense greenhouse effect and driving surface temperatures high enough to melt lead and to prohibit the formation of carbonate minerals. Volcanoes continually vented more carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. On Earth, liquid water removes carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and combines it with calcium, from rock weathering, to form carbonate sedimentary rocks. Without liquid water to remove carbon from the atmosphere, the level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere of Venus remains high.
Like Venus, Earth is large enough to be geologically active and for its gravitational field to hold an atmosphere. Unlike Venus, it is just the right distance from the Sun so that temperature ranges allow water to exist as a liquid, a solid, and a gas. Water is thus extremely mobile and moves rapidly over the planet in a continuous hydrologic cycle. Heated by the Sun, the water moves in great cycles from the oceans to the atmosphere, over the landscape in river systems, and ultimately back to the oceans. As a result, Earth's surface has been continually changed and eroded into delicate systems of river valleys - a remarkable contrast to the surfaces of other planetary bodies where impact craters dominate. Few areas on Earth have been untouched by flowing water. As a result, river valleys are the dominant feature of its landscape. Similarly, wind action has scoured fine particles away from large areas, depositing them elsewhere as vast sand seas dominated by dunes or in sheets of loess (fine-grained soil deposits). These fluid movements are caused by gravity flow systems energized by heat from the Sun. Other geologic changes occur when the gases in the atmosphere or water react with rocks at the surface to form new chemical compounds with different properties. An important example of this process was the removal of most of Earths carbon dioxide from its atmosphere to form carbonate rocks. However, if Earth were a little closer to the Sun, its oceans would evaporate; if it were farther from the Sun, the oceans would freeze solid. Because liquid water was present, self-replicating molecules of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen developed life early in Earth's history and have radically modified its surface, blanketing huge parts of the continents with greenery. Life thrives on this planet, and it helped create the planet's oxygen- and nitrogen-rich atmosphere and moderate temperatures.
 
The word "modify" in the passage is closest in meaning to
obtain
change
replace
absorb
The word "drastically" in the passage is closest in meaning to
gradually
permanently
extensively
possibly
Paragraph 1 supports all of the following statements about fluids EXCEPT
They can chemically react with particles on a planets surface.
Most of their mass does not flow but remains in place.
Their movement can reshape the surface of certain kinds of planets.
Their movement is driven by the Sun and by gravity.
The word prohibit in the passage is closest in meaning to
prevent
speed up
affect
encourage
According to paragraph 2, what is one difference between Earth and Venus?
Earth has less water in its atmosphere than Venus does.
Earth has a hydrologic system but Venus does not.
Earth is less geologically active than Venus is.
Earth has more carbon dioxide than Venus does.
It can be inferred from paragraph 2 that Earth evolved differently than Venus did in part because
there was more volcanic activity on early Venus than on early Earth
they received different amounts of solar energy
their interiors contained different amounts of heat
their early atmospheres contained different levels of oxygen and nitrogen
According to paragraph 2, all of the following played a role in keeping carbon dioxide levels high in the atmosphere of Venus EXCEPT
the breaking apart of water molecules by ultraviolet rays
the evaporation of water released from the planet's interior
the escape of hydrogen into space
the release of molecules from melting metals such as lead
The word "ultimately" in the passage is closest in meaning to
finally
slowly
repeatedly
constantly
According to paragraph 3, Earth's surface is different from the surfaces of many other planetary bodies in which of the following ways?
It is more strongly marked by river valleys and erosion.
It is more geologically active.
It is covered by impact craters.
It has an atmosphere.
According to paragraph 3, why is water able to move so freely on Earth?
Earth's temperatures are such that water exists in solid, liquid, and gas forms.
Earth is large enough to be geologically active and for its gravitational field to hold an atmosphere.
Earths surface allows river valleys to develop across the landscape.
Earth has active winds that blow across seas and oceans causing fluid movements.
Why does the author point out that on Earth "gases in the atmosphere or water react with rocks at the surface to form new chemical compounds"?
To explain why scientists believe that few areas on Earth have been untouched by flowing water.
To identify one of several ways in which the movement of fluids can affect the surface of a planet.
To provide evidence that fluid movements are caused by gravity flow systems energized by the Sun.
To identify an effect of wind scouring fine particles away from large areas.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Life on Earth is responsible for many changes to the planet's surface, including blankets of greenery.
Self-replicating molecules of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen led to the development of life early in Earth's history.
The presence of water made it possible for life to develop early in Earth's history and to significantly change its surface.
Early in life's history on Earth, self-replicating molecules of carbon hydrogen, and oxygen began blanketing the surface in greenery.

Because of industrialization, but also because of a vast increase in agricultural output without which industrialization would have been impossible, Western Europeans by the latter half of the nineteenth century enjoyed higher standards of living and longer, healthier lives than most of the worlds peoples. In Europe as a whole, the population rose from 188 million in 1800 to 400 million in 1900. By 1900, virtually every area of Europe had contributed to the tremendous surge of population, but each major region was at a different stage of demographic change.
Improvements in the food supply continued trends that had started in the late seventeenth century. New lands were put under cultivation, while the use of crops of American origin, particularly the potato, continued to expand. Setbacks did occur. Regional agricultural failures were the most common cause of economic recessions until 1850, and they could lead to localized famine as well. A major potato blight (disease) in 1846-1847 led to the deaths of at least one million persons in Ireland and the emigration of another million, and Ireland never recovered the population levels the potato had sustained to that point. Bad grain harvests at the same time led to increased hardship throughout much of Europe.
After 1850, however, the expansion of foods more regularly kept pace with population growth, though the poorer classes remained malnourished. Two developments were crucial. First, the application of science and new technology to agriculture increased. Led by German universities, increasing research was devoted to improving seeds, developing chemical fertilizers, and advancing livestock. After 1861, with the development of land-grant universities in the United States that had huge agricultural programs, American crop-production research added to this mix. Mechanization included the use of horse-drawn harvesters and seed drills, many developed initially in the United States. It also included mechanical cream separators and other food-processing devices that improved supply.
The second development involved industrially based transportation. With trains and steam shipping, it became possible to move foods to needy regions within Western Europe quickly. Famine (as opposed to malnutrition) became a thing of the past. Many Western European countries, headed by Britain, began also to import increasing amounts of food, not only from Eastern Europe, a traditional source, but also from the Americas, Australia, and New Zealand. Steam shipping, which improved speed and capacity, as well as new procedures for canning and refrigerating foods (particularly after 1870), was fundamental to these developments.
Europe's population growth included one additional innovation by the nineteenth century: it combined with rapid urbanization. More and more Western Europeans moved from countryside to city, and big cities grew most rapidly of all. By 1850, over half of all the people in England lived in cities, a first in human history. In one sense, this pattern seems inevitable growing numbers of people pressed available resources on the land, even when farmwork was combined with a bit of manufacturing, so people crowded into cities seeking work or other resources. Traditionally, however, death rates in cities surpassed those in the countryside by a large margin; cities had maintained population only through steady in-migration. Thus rapid urbanization should have reduced overall population growth, but by the middle of the nineteenth century this was no longer the case. Urban death rates remained high, particularly in the lower-class slums, but they began to decline rapidly.
The greater reliability of food supplies was a factor in the decline of urban death rates.   Even more important were the gains in urban sanitation, as well as measures such as inspection of housing.   Reformers, including enlightened doctors, began to study the causes of high death rates and to urge remediation. Even before the discovery of germs, beliefs that disease spread by "miasmas" (noxious forms of bad air) prompted attention to sewers and open garbage; Edwin Chadwick led an exemplary urban crusade for underground sewers in England in the 1830s.   Gradually, public health provisions began to cut into customary urban mortality rates.   By 1900, in some parts of Western Europe life expectancy in the cities began to surpass that of the rural areas. Industrial societies had figured out ways to combine large and growing cities with population growth, a development that would soon spread to other parts of the world.
 
According to paragraph 1, which of the following is true about Europe in the nineteenth century?
A large increase in food production led to industrialization.
Population changes occurred at the same pace in the major regions.
The standard of living rose to the level of that in most parts of the world.
The tremendous rise in population led to greater agricultural output in every region.
According to paragraph 2, which of the following caused the food supply to increase in most of Western Europe during the nineteenth century?
Replacement of seventeenth-century farming techniques with more modern ones
Improved grain harvests in most European countries
Reduced demand for food as a result of a decreased population
Use of new land to grow crops
In paragraph 2, why does the author mention the potato blight that occurred in Ireland?
To identify a crop that was more successful in the United States than it was in Western Europe
To support a claim about regional agricultural failures
To give an example of a problematic trend that had started in the late seventeenth century
To provide evidence that many countries in Europe experienced a loss of population in the nineteenth century
The phrase "kept pace with" in the passage is closest in meaning to
exceeded
matched the increase in
increased the rate of
caused
According to paragraph 3, all of the following factors helped the supply of food meet the needs of a growing population EXCEPT
increased agricultural research in Germany
introduction of new crops
development of food-processing devices
agricultural programs in universities in the United States
The word "capacity" in the passage is closest in meaning to
variety of goods
distance
reliability
available storage space
According to paragraph 4, famine became less of a problem in Western Europe during the nineteenth century because of
the decline of malnutrition
the construction of more food-storage facilities
faster means of transportation
improved agricultural methods in Eastern Europe
The word "inevitable" in the passage is closest in meaning to
unexplainable
undesirable
unavoidable
unpredictable
According to paragraph 5, which of the following factors led to rapid urbanization in the first half of the nineteenth century?
The destruction of many farms due to bad harvests
The reduction in the amount of good-quality farmland
The rise in death rates in the countryside
The lack of jobs in the countryside
The word "surpass" in the passage is closest in meaning to
exceed
influence
equal
differ from
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 6 about underground sewers?
They became common in most of Western Europe in the 1830s.
They helped reduce deaths caused by disease in cities.
They led to the discovery that disease could be caused by germs.
They encouraged people to leave rural areas and move to the cities.
Paragraph 6 mentions all of the following as factors that contributed to the rapid decline of urban death rates EXCEPT
the greater reliability of food supplies
improvements in sanitation
advances in the treatment of disease
provisions for inspecting houses

Many plants  one or more species of at least 68 different families  can secrete nectar even when they have no blossoms, because they bear extrafloral nectaries (structures that produce nectar) on stems, leaves, leaf stems, or other structures. These plants usually occur where ants are abundant, most in the tropics but some in temperate areas. Among those of northeastern North America are various plums, cherries, roses, hawthorns, poplars, and oaks. Like floral nectar, extrafloral nectar consists mainly of water with a high content of dissolved sugars and, in some plants, small amounts of amino acids. The extrafloral nectaries of some plants are known to attract ants and other insects, but the evolutionary history of most plants with these nectaries is unknown. Nevertheless, most ecologists believe that all extrafloral nectaries attract insects that will defend the plant.
Ants are probably the most frequent and certainly the most persistent defenders of plants. Since the highly active worker ants require a great deal of energy, plants exploit this need by providing extrafloral nectar that supplies ants with abundant energy.  To return this favor, ants guard the nectaries, driving away or killing intruding insects that might compete with ants for nectar. Many of these intruders are herbivorous and would eat the leaves of the plants. 
Biologists once thought that secretion of extrafloral nectar has some purely internal physiological function, and that ants provide no benefit whatsoever to the plants that secrete it. This view and the opposing protectionist hypothesis that ants defend plants had been disputed for over a hundred years when, in 1910, a skeptical William Morton Wheeler commented on the controversy. He called for proof of the protectionist view: that visitations of the ants confer protection on the plants and that in the absence of the insects a much greater number would perish or fail to produce flowers or seeds than when the insects are present. That we now have an abundance of the proof that was called for was established when Barbara Bentley reviewed the relevant evidence in 1977, and since then many more observations and experiments have provided still further proof that ants benefit plants.
One example shows how ants attracted to extrafloral nectaries protect morning glories against attacking insects. The principal insect enemies of the North American morning glory feed mainly on its flowers or fruits rather than its leaves. Grasshoppers feeding on flowers indirectly block pollination and the production of seeds by destroying the corolla or the stigma, which receives the pollen grains and on which the pollen germinates. Without their colorful corolla, flowers do not attract pollinators and are not fertilized. An adult grasshopper can consume a large corolla, about 2.5 inches long, in an hour. Caterpillars and seed beetles affect seed production directly. Caterpillars devour the ovaries, where the seeds are produced, and seed beetle larvae eat seeds as they burrow in developing fruits.
Extrafloral nectaries at the base of each sepal attract several kinds of insects, but 96 percent of them are ants, several different species of them. When buds are still small, less than a quarter of an inch long, the sepal nectaries are already present and producing nectar. They continue to do so as the flower develops and while the fruit matures. Observations leave little doubt that ants protect morning glory flowers and fruits from the combined enemy force of grasshoppers, caterpillars, and seed beetles. Bentley compares the seed production of six plants that grew where there were no ants with that of seventeen plants that were occupied by ants. Unprotected plants bore only 45 seeds per plant, but plants occupied by ants bore 211 seeds per plant. Although ants are not big enough to kill or seriously injure grasshoppers, they drive them away by nipping at their feet. Seed beetles are more vulnerable because they are much smaller than grasshoppers. The ants prey on the adult beetles, disturb females as they lay their eggs on developing fruits, and eat many of the eggs they do manage to lay.
 
According to paragraph 1, floral nectar and extrafloral nectar are alike in that
they are likely to be produced by the same plants
they basically consist of the same chemical components
they attract only insects that will defend the plant
they are produced by the same parts of the plant
To say that ants are persistent defenders of plants means that
they defend plants against a wide variety of threats
they continue to defend plants for as long as the plants are threatened
they are successful defenders of plants
they are easily observable defenders of plants
What can be inferred from paragraph 2 about the ants that are attracted to the extrafloral nectaries?
They do not eat the leaves of the plants that produce extrafloral nectar.
They live almost entirely on extrafloral nectar.
They spend most of their energy guarding extrafloral nectaries.
They frequently fight among themselves over extrafloral nectar.
According to paragraph 3, what was the position of the opponents of the protectionist hypothesis?
Extrafloral nectar provides plants with a direct defense against attack by insects.
Ants substantially benefit plants that secrete extrafloral nectar.
The secretion of extrafloral nectar plays a role in the plants internal functioning.
Ants visit plants that secrete extrafloral nectar as often as they visit plants that do not.
The word skeptical in the passage is closest in meaning to
curious
doubtful
open-minded
practical
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
We now have ample proof that ants benefit plants.
Barbara Bentley has called for additional proof that ants benefit plants.
In 1977 Barbara Bentley conducted research that proved that all prior studies were wrong.
Proof that ants benefit plants will require many more observations and experiments.
According to paragraph 4, what effect does the destruction of the corolla have on plants?
It leaves the seeds exposed and unprotected.
It prevents the stigma from developing.
It keeps pollen grains from attaching properly.
It prevents the flower from attracting pollinators.
The word devour in the passage is closest in meaning to
attack
eat
damage
prefer
What role does paragraph 5 play in the passage?
It offers various kinds of evidence for the protectionist view.
It presents the study that first proved that ants benefit plants.
It explains how insects find sources of nectar.
It presents information that partly contradicts the protectionist view.
The word vulnerable in the passage is closest in meaning to
numerous
harmful
open to attack
difficult to locate
According to paragraph 5, what did Bentleys comparative study show?
Many more plants grew in places where ants were present than where they were absent.
The ants preferred plants with low seed production to plants with high seed production.
The plants occupied by ants produced many more seeds than those that were not occupied by ants.
The plants that grew in places without ants were much smaller and weaker than those that grew in places where ants were present.
According to paragraph 5, ants defend morning glory plants from seed beetles in each of the following ways EXCEPT
driving adult beetles off the plants by nipping at their feet
catching and eating adult beetles
eating beetle eggs they find on developing fruits
making it difficult for beetles to lay eggs on developing fruits

In the United States, railroads spearheaded the second phase of the transportation revolution by overtaking the previous importance of canals. The mid-1800s saw a great expansion of American railroads. The major cities east of the Mississippi River were linked by a spiderweb of railroad tracks.  Chicago's growth illustrates the impact of these rail links.  In 1849 Chicago was a village of a few hundred people with virtually no rail service.  By 1860 it had become a city of 100,000, served by eleven railroads.  Farmers to the north and west of Chicago no longer had to ship their grain, livestock, and dairy products down the Mississippi River to New Orleans; they could now ship their products directly east. Chicago supplanted New Orleans as the interior of America's main commercial hub.
The east-west rail lines stimulated the settlement and agricultural development of the Midwest. By 1860 Illinois, Indiana, and Wisconsin had replaced Ohio, Pennsylvania, and New York as the leading wheat-growing states. Enabling farmers to speed their products to the East, railroads increased the value of farmland and promoted additional settlement. In turn, population growth in agricultural areas triggered industrial development in cities such as Chicago, Davenport (Iowa), and Minneapolis, for the new settlers needed lumber for fences and houses and mills to grind wheat into flour.
Railroads also propelled the growth of small towns along their routes. The Illinois Central Railroad, which had more track than any other railroad in 1855, made money not only from its traffic but also from real estate speculation. Purchasing land for stations along its path, the Illinois Central then laid out towns around the stations. The selection of Manteno, Illinois, as a stop of the Illinois Central, for example, transformed the site from a crossroads without a single house in 1854 into a bustling town of nearly a thousand in 1860, replete with hotels, lumberyards, grain elevators, and gristmills. By the Civil War (1861-1865), few thought of the railroad-linked Midwest as a frontier region or viewed its inhabitants as pioneers.
As the nation's first big business, the railroads transformed the conduct of business. During the early 1830s, railroads, like canals, depended on financial aid from state governments. With the onset of economic depression in the late 1830s, however, state governments scrapped overly ambitious railroad projects. Convinced that railroads burdened them with high taxes and blasted hopes, voters turned against state aid, and in the early 1840s, several states amended their constitutions to bar state funding for railroads and canals. The federal government took up some of the slack, but federal aid did not provide a major stimulus to railroads before 1860. Rather, part of the burden of finance passed to city and county governments in agricultural areas that wanted to attract railroads. Such municipal governments, for example, often gave railroads rights-of-way, grants of land for stations, and public funds.
The dramatic expansion of the railroad network in the 1850s, however, strained the financing capacity of local governments and required a turn toward private investment, which had never been absent from the picture. Well aware of the economic benefits of railroads, individuals living near them had long purchased railroad stock issued by governments and had directly bought stock in railroads, often paying by contributing their labor to building the railroads. But the large railroads of the 1850s needed more capital than such small investors could generate. Gradually, the center of railroad financing shifted to New York City, and in fact, it was the railroad boom of the 1850s that helped make Wall Street in New York City the nation's greatest capital market. The stocks of all the leading railroads were traded on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange during the 1850s. In addition, the growth of railroads turned New York City into the center of modern investment firms. The investment firms evaluated the stock of railroads in the smaller American cities and then found purchasers for these stocks in New York City, Philadelphia, Paris, London, Amsterdam, and Hamburg. Controlling the flow of funds to railroads, the investment bankers began to exert influence over the railroads' internal affairs by supervising administrative reorganizations in times of trouble.
 
According to paragraph 1, what effect did the expansion of rail links have on Chicago?
Chicago became the headquarters for eleven new railroads
Chicago became the most important city east of the Mississippi River
Chicago was transformed from a village into a large city
Chicago replaced eastern cities as the main buyer of farm products from the region
Paragraph 2 supports the idea that Illinois, Indiana, and Wisconsin were able to become the leading wheat-growing states by 1860 in large part because
by 1860 there were more railroads in Illinois, Indiana, and Wisconsin than in Ohio, Pennsylvania, and New York
the expansion of east-west rail lines made transporting Midwestern products to East Coast markets relatively fast and easy
by 1860 states such as Ohio, Pennsylvania, and New York had become more interested in industrial development than in agriculture
most of the farmers who had grown wheat in Ohio, Pennsylvania, or New York resettled in the Midwest after the expansion of east-west rail lines
The word "promoted" in the passage is closest in meaning to
encouraged
controlled
promised
predicted
According to paragraph 2, one effect of the increased agricultural development in the Midwest was to
slow the rate at which population grew in many Midwestern cities
increase the demand for industrial products from Midwestern cities
encourage the extension of east-west rail lines to the Midwest
reduce the pressure on Midwestern farmers to get their products to market faster
The author mentions "Manteno, Illinois" in order to
give an example of how railroads decided which small towns would be selected for stations
illustrate the power of railroads to determine where towns would come into existence
explain how some railroads were able to make more money from real estate speculation than from railroad traffic
show how people's view of the Midwest as a frontier region had changed by the Civil War
The word "bustling" in the passage is closest in meaning to
commercial
wealthy
lively
modern
The word "onset" in the passage is closest in meaning to
possibility
fear
worsening
start
According to paragraph 4, how were railroads affected by the economic depression in the late 1830s?
They lost important funding from state governments
They began to realize that some of their projects were overly ambitious
They had to compete with canals for government support
They emerged as the nation's biggest business
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Private investment in railroads began in the 1850s following the dramatic expansion of the railroad network, which had been financed by local governments
Railroads' relations with local governments became strained in the 1850s, when railroads turned to private investors for financing to expand their capacity
Local governments' limited capacity to finance railroad expansion was a long-standing problem that railroads solved in the 1850s by turning toward private investment
When local governments could not adequately finance the railroads' dramatic expansion in the 1850s, private investment became increasingly important
Paragraph 5 supports which of the following ideas about people who held railroad stock?
Many of them were not particularly wealthy
Many of them overestimated the economic benefits of railroads
Most of them bought their stock for less than it was worth
Most of them had been employed by a railroad
According to paragraph 5, investment bankers were involved in all of the following EXCEPT
controlling the distribution of funds to railroads
finding national and international buyers of railroad stock
overseeing administrative changes of railroads when needed
persuading the federal government to reinvest in railroads
The word "flow" in the passage is closest in meaning to
promise
growth
movement
source

In contrast to the political anarchy, economic dislocation, and military destruction in Spanish America, Brazil's drive toward independence from Portugal proceeded as a relatively bloodless transition between 1808 and 1822. The idea of Brazilian independence first arose in the late eighteenth century as a Brazilian reaction to the Portuguese policy of tightening political and economic control over the colony in the interests of the mother country. The first significant conspiracy against Portuguese rule was organized from 1788-1799 in the province of Minas Gerais, where rigid governmental control over the production and prices of gold and diamonds, as well as heavy taxes, caused much discontent. But this conspiracy never went beyond the stage of discussion and was easily discovered and crushed. Other conspiracies in the late eighteenth century as well as a brief revolt in 1817 reflected the influence of republican ideas over sections of the elite and even the lower strata of urban society. All proved abortive or were soon crushed. Were it not for an accident of European history, the independence of Brazil might have been long delayed.
The French invasion of Portugal in 1807 followed by the flight of the Portuguese court (sovereign and government officers) to Rio de Janeiro brought large benefits to Brazil. Indeed, the transfer of the court in effect signified achievement of Brazilian independence. The Portuguese prince and future King Joao VI opened Brazil's ports to the trade of friendly nations, permitted the rise of local industries, and founded the Bank of Brazil.  In 1815 he elevated Brazil to the legal status of a kingdom coequal with Portugal.  ln one sense, however, Brazil's new status signified the substitution of one dependence for another.  Freed from Portuguese control, Brazil came under the economic dominance of England, which obtained major tariff concessions and other privileges by the Strangford Treaty of 1810 between Portugal and Great Britain.  The treaty provided for the importation of British manufactures into Brazil and the export of Brazilian agricultural produce to Great Britain. One result was an influx of cheap machine-made goods that swamped the handicrafts industry of the country.
Brazilian elites took satisfaction in Brazil's new role and the growth of educational, cultural, and economic opportunities for their class. But the feeling was mixed with resentment toward the thousands of Portuguese courtiers (officials) and hangers-on who came with the court and who competed with Brazilians for jobs and favors. Thus, the change in the status of Brazil sharpened the conflict between Portuguese elites born in Brazil and elites born in Portugal and loyal to the Portuguese crown.
The event that precipitated the break with the mother country was the revolution of 1820 in Portugal. The Portuguese revolutionaries framed a liberal constitution for the kingdom, but they were conservative or reactionary in relation to Brazil. They demanded the immediate return of King Joao to Lisbon, an end to the system of dual monarchy that he had devised, and the restoration of the Portuguese commercial monopoly. Timid and vacillating, King Joao did not know which way to turn. Under the pressure of his courtiers, who hungered to return to Portugal and their lost estates, he finally approved the new constitution and sailed for Portugal. He left behind him, however, his son and heir, Pedro, and in a private letter advised him that in the event the Brazilians should demand independence, he should assume leadership of the movement and set the crown of Brazil on his head.
Soon it became clear that the Portuguese parliament intended to set the clock back by abrogating all the liberties and concessions won by Brazil since 1808. One of its decrees insisted on the immediate return of Pedro from Brazil. The pace of events moved more rapidly in 1822. On January 9, urged on by Brazilian advisers who perceived a golden opportunity to make an orderly transition to independence without the intervention of the masses, Pedro refused an order from the parliament to return to Portugal, saying famously, "l remain." On September 7, regarded by all Brazilians as Independence Day, he issued the even more celebrated proclamation, "Independence or death!" In December 1822, having overcome slight resistance by Portuguese troops, Dom Pedro was formally proclaimed constitutional Emperor of Brazil.
 
The word "anarchy" in the passage is closest in meaning to
uncertainty
disorder
powerlessness
violence
According to paragraph 1, what first caused Brazilians to think seriously about trying to achieve independence from Portugal?
Portugal's declining interest in having overseas colonies
Portugal's moves to gain political and economic control of Brazil for its own advantage
The drive toward independence going on at the time in parts of Spanish America
The Portuguese reaction to Brazil's efforts to gain control over its economy
According to paragraph 1, what happened to the 1788-1799 conspiracy against Portuguese rule?
It ended up creating discontent in certain provinces of Brazil
It increasingly came under the influence of republican ideas from Portugal
It was crushed before it got beyond the planning stage
It gradually lost the support of the lower strata of urban society
According to paragraph 2, Brazil gained a significant measure of independence early in the nineteenth century primarily as a result of
the Portuguese prince's desire to become King of Brazil rather than King of Portugal
Brazil's growing industrial and financial importance
the flight of the Portuguese court to Rio de Janeiro
the Strangford Treaty with England
According to paragraph 2, King Joao did each of the following for Brazil EXCEPT
establish a national bank
support Brazilian industries
obtain important tariff concessions from England
encourage trade with a wider range of nations
The word "precipitated" in the passage is closest in meaning to
came before
brought about
resulted from
slowed down
According to paragraph 4, the Portuguese revolutionaries insisted on each of the following EXCEPT
King Joaos immediate return to Portugal
the creation of a liberal constitution for Brazil
an end to Brazil's status as a kingdom
Portuguese control over the Brazilian economy
The word "Timid" in the passage is closest in meaning to
Fearful
Angry
Poor
Sickly
In paragraph 4, why does the author mention that King Joao's courtiers "hungered to return to Portugal and their lost estates"?
To illustrate how conservative the courtiers were
To help explain the position taken by the courtiers
To give an example of the effects produced by the revolution
To show why King Joao advised his son the way he did
Paragraphs 4 and 5 support the idea that Brazil's move to declare independence in 1822 was primarily the result of
the revolutionaries' demand that King Joao return to Portugal
Portugal's apparent intention to return Brazil to the status of a colony
King Joao's decision to leave his son Pedro in Brazil
the growing threat of intervention by the Brazilian masses
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
On January 9, 1822, Brazil achieved independence without any involvement by the masses when Pedro, despite the urging of his Brazilian advisers, defied a parliamentary order to return to Portugal
Following the urging of Brazilian advisers, on January 9, 1822, the Portuguese parliament ordered Pedro to return, but, hoping to avoid conflict with the masses, Pedro declared, "l remain."
The best opportunity for Brazil to achieve independence without involving the masses came on January 9. 1822, but Pedro, saying, "I remain," refused an order to return to Portugal
Seeing the possibility of an orderly transition to independence, Pedro's Brazilian advisers urged him to refuse to return to Portugal, and on January 9, 1822, Pedro did refuse, declaring, "I remain."
According to paragraph 5, Independence Day in Brazil is the date on which
Brazil made Dom Pedro its constitutional Emperor
Dom Pedro refused to comply with the Portuguese parliament's demand that he return to Portugal
the Portuguese parliament officially withdrew all formal connection to Brazil
Dom Pedro publicly declared his position by saying, "Independence or death!"

Until the early- to mid-twentieth century, scientists believed that stars generate energy by shrinking.  As stars contracted, it was thought, they would get hotter and hotter, giving off light in the process.  This could not be the primary way that stars shine, however.  If it were, they would scarcely last a million years, rather than the billions of years in age that we know they are.  We now know that stars are fueled by nuclear fusion. Each time fusion takes place, energy is released as a by-product. This energy, expelled into space, is what we see as starlight. The fusion process begins when two hydrogen nuclei smash together to form a particle called the deuteron (a combination of a positive proton and a neutral neutron). Deuterons readily combine with additional protons to form helium. Helium, in turn, can fuse together to form heavier elements, such as carbon. In a typical star, merger after merger takes place until significant quantities of heavy elements are built up.
We must distinguish, at this point, between two different stellar types: Population I and Population ll, the latter being much older than the former. These groups can also be distinguished by their locations. Our galaxy, the Milky Way, is shaped like a flat disk surrounding a central bulge. Whereas Population I stars are found mainly in the galactic disk, Population II stars mostly reside in the central bulge of the galaxy and in the halo surrounding this bulge.
Population II stars date to the early stages of the universe. Formed when the cosmos was filled with hydrogen and helium gases, they initially contained virtually no heavy elements. They shine until their fusible material is exhausted. When Population II stars die, their material is spread out into space. Some of this dust is eventually incorporated into newly formed Population I stars. Though Population I stars consist mostly of hydrogen and helium gas, they also contain heavy elements (heavier than helium), which comprise about 1 or 2 percent of their mass. These heavier materials are fused from the lighter elements that the stars have collected. Thus, Population I stars contain material that once belonged to stars from previous generations. The Sun is a good example of a Population I star.
What will happen when the Sun dies? In several billion years, our mother star will burn much brighter. It will expend more and more of its nuclear fuel, until little is left of its original hydrogen. Then, at some point in the far future, all nuclear reactions in the Suns center will cease.
Once the Sun passes into its "postnuclear" phase, it will separate effectively into two different regions: an inner zone and an outer zone. While no more hydrogen fuel will remain in the inner zone, there will be a small amount left in the outer zone. Rapidly, changes will begin to take place that will serve to tear the Sun apart. The inner zone, its nuclear fires no longer burning, will begin to collapse under the influence of its own weight and will contract into a tiny hot core, dense and dim. An opposite fate will await the outer region, a loosely held-together ball of gas. A shock wave caused by the inner zone's contraction will send ripples through the dying star, pushing the stellar exterior's material farther and farther outward. The outer envelope will then grow rapidly, increasing, in a short interval, hundreds of times in size. As it expands, it will cool down by thousands of degrees. Eventually, the Sun will become a red giant star, cool and bright. It will be so large that it will occupy the whole space that used to be the Earth's orbit and so brilliant that it would be able to be seen with the naked eye thousands of light-years away. It will exist that way for millions of years, gradually releasing the material of its outer envelope into space. Finally, nothing will be left of the gaseous exterior of the Sun; all that will remain will be the hot, white core. The Sun will have become a white dwarf star. The core will shrink, giving off the last of its energy, and the Sun will finally die.
 
The word "readily" in the passage is closest in meaning to
eventually
easily
constantly
loosely
According to paragraph 1, the energy that comes from stars and that is seen as light is the result of
protons combining with helium atoms
atoms of heavier elements smashing together
various particles fusing with one another
hydrogen atoms breaking apart
In paragraph 1, why does the author point out that stars are billions of years old?
To establish that starlight is produced by an ongoing process and not by a one-time event
To suggest that stars contract much more slowly than was previously believed
To argue that shrinking cannot be the main way stars generate energy
To argue that fusion in a star slows down as quantities of heavy elements build up
According to paragraph 2, Population I stars and Population II stars differ from each other in terms of both
how old they are and where in their galaxies they are found
how old they are and whether they have a halo around them
where in their galaxies they are found and whether they bulge out in the center
whether they are at the center of a flat disk and whether they have a halo
According to paragraphs 2 and 3, all of the following are true of Population I stars EXCEPT
They contain material that was once contained in Population II stars
In terms of their mass, they consist primarily of hydrogen and helium
They contain elements that were formed through the fusion of lighter ones
They generally do not last as long as Population II stars
The word "virtually" in the passage is closest in meaning to
absolutely
usually
almost
as a result
The word "exhausted" in the passage is closest in meaning to
used up
released
invisible
broken up
The word "comprise" in the passage is closest in meaning to
absorb
lose
increase to
make up
Why does the author ask the question "What will happen when the Sun dies?" ?
To identify the most serious question concerning star death that scientists must address
To introduce the topic that the rest of the passage will discuss
To suggest that scientists remain uncertain about some aspects of star death
To suggest that the Sun may not be a good example of a Population I star
According to paragraph 5, once the Sun is in its "postnuclear" phase, the outer zone will differ from the inner zone in that the outer zone will
undergo a much less dramatic change in size
maintain more nearly constant temperatures
cease to be a site of energy-generating activity
still contain some amount of hydrogen
According to paragraph 5, which of the following will be true about the inner core of the dying Sun?
It will contract, sending an energy wave through the rest of the star
It will shine with a bright red glow before it finally shrinks and dies
It will expand to hundreds of times its previous size
It will shrink due to the weight of the outer envelope
Paragraph 5 supports which of the following about the death of the Sun?
The Sun's outer envelope will expand rapidly as a result of decreasing temperatures in the outer zone
The Sun will reach the red giant stage millions of years before it becomes a white dwarf star
After the Sun has released the material of its outer envelope into space, nuclear fusion will continue at the remaining core for a limited period
While the outer region of the Sun expands, it releases all its material into space

Information on past climates is of primary relevance to archaeology because of what it tells us about the effects on the land and on the resources that people needed to survive. The most crucial effect of climate was on the sheer quantity of land available in each period, measurable by studying ancient coastlines. These have changed constantly through time, even in relatively recent periods, as can be seen from the Neolithic stone circle of Er Lannic, in Brittany, France (once inland but now half submerged on an island) or medieval villages in east Yorkshire, England, that have tumbled into the sea in the last few centuries as the North Sea gnaws its way westward and erodes the cliffs. Conversely, silts deposited by rivers sometimes push the sea farther back, creating new land, as at Ephesus in western Turkey, a port on the coast in Roman times but today some five kilometers inland.
Nevertheless, for archeologists concerned with the long periods of time of the Paleolithic period, there are variations in coastlines of much greater magnitude to consider. The expansion and contraction of the continental glaciers caused huge and uneven rises and falls in sea levels worldwide. When the ice sheets grew, the sea level would drop as water became locked up in the glaciers; when the ice melted, the sea level would rise again. Falls in sea level often exposed a number of important land bridges, such as those linking Alaska to northeast Asia and Britain to northwest Europe, a phenomenon with far-reaching effects not only on human colonization of the globe but also on the environment as a whole - the flora and fauna of isolated or insular areas were radically and often irreversibly affected. Between Alaska and Asia today lies the Bering Strait, which is so shallow that a fall in sea level of only four meters would turn it into a land bridge. When the ice sheets were at their greatest extent some 18,000 years ago (the glacier maximum), it is thought that the fall was about 120 meters, which therefore created not merely a bridge but a vast plain,1,000 kilometers from the north to the south, which has been called Beringia. The existence of Beringia (and the extent to which it could have supported human life) is one of the crucial pieces of evidence in the continuing debate about the likely route and date of human colonization of the New World.
The assessment of past rises and falls in sea level requires study of submerged land surfaces off the coast and of raised or elevated beaches on land. Raised beaches are remnants of former coastlines at higher levels relative to the present shoreline and visible, for instance, along the Californian coast north of San Francisco. The height of a raised beach above the present shoreline, however, does not generally give a straightforward indication of the height of a former sea level. In the majority of cases, the beaches lie at a higher level because the land has been raised up through isostatic uplift or tectonic movement. Isostatic uplift of the land occurs when the weight of ice is removed as temperatures rise, as at the end of an ice age; it has affected coastlines, for example, in Scandinavia, Scotland, Alaska, and Newfoundland during the postglacial period. Tectonic movements involve displacements in the plates that make up Earths crust. Middle and Late Pleistocene raised beaches in the Mediterranean are one instance of such movements.
  Raised beaches often consist of areas of sand, pebbles, or dunes, sometimes containing seashells or piles of debris comprising shells and bones of marine animals used by humans.  In Tokyo Bay, for example, shell mounds of the Jomon period (about 10,000 to 300 B.C.E.)mark the position of the shoreline at a time of maximum inundation by the sea (6,500-5,500 years ago),when, through tectonic movement, the sea was three to five meters higher in relation to the contemporary landmass of Japan than at present.  Analysis of the shells themselves has confirmed the changes in marine topography, for it is only during the maximum phase that subtropical species of mollusc are present, indicating a higher water temperature.  
 
The word "crucial" in the passage is closest in meaning to
interesting
important
established
understood
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
In the last few centuries, the erosion of coastline created the Neolithic stone circle in Brittany, France, at the same time that it destroyed the medieval villages in Yorkshire, England
Coastlines have changed even in recent times as shown by the current locations of certain Neolithic monuments and medieval villages
Recent changes in the coastlines near the Neolithic stone circle of Er Lannic in Brittany, France, and the medieval villages in Yorkshire, England, suggest that ancient coastlines changed in similar ways
Changes in coastlines can lead to the creation of islands such as Er Lannic in France or the total erosion of the cliffs as in Yorkshire in England, though no considerable changes have occurred in recent periods
According to paragraph 1, the city of Ephesus in western Turkey is an example of which of the following?
Recent changes in the shoreline that have resulted in the creation of new land
Port cities that have lost shoreline due to the erosion of land
The ocean's role in the formation of new land
The importance of changes in shoreline to cities located inland
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 2 about the effects of climate change during the Paleolithic period?
The amount of land not covered by water was a greater during warmer periods
Warmer weather encouraged the expansion of the range of flora and fauna
As a result of colder weather,land bridges became exposed
The rise of sea level occurred during periods of cold weather
By indicating that flora and fauna of isolated or insular areas were often irreversibly affected by the changes due to the Ice Age, the author means that the flora and fauna were
unable to return to their previous conditions
in a constant state of change
completely destroyed by human colonization
unevenly distributed across the area
According to paragraph 2, all of the following are true of Beringia EXCEPT
It may have been used by the people who first colonized North America
It may have been large enough to support life
It was probably still four meters under water during the glacier maximum
It was probably a vast plain
What purpose does the discussion about the Bering Strait in paragraph 2 serve in the passage?
It explains the idea that changes in coastlines do not necessarily result in significant alternations to existing marine life
It illustrates the kind of impact that variations in land availability caused by climate change can have
It provides a large amount of archaeological evidence that casts doubt on changes in sea level during the Paleolithic period
It shows how ancient coastlines can serve as useful models in understanding recent changes in coastlines
The word "remnants" in the passage is closest meaning to
remains
regions
points
origins
According to paragraph 3, why is the height of a raised beach not a straightforward indicator of past sea level?
The height of the beach may have been raised or altered by human interventions in the shore environment
The height of the beach may be the result of erosion over a brief period of time
It is difficult to assess if the sea actually existed at that level for any significant period of time
The surface of Earth may have shifted,moving the beach from its original position
According to paragraph 3, which of following causes an isostatic uplift?
Shifts in Earth's crust
A decrease in the pressure of thick ice sheets
A decrease in temperature
Changes in sea level
The word "comprising" in the passage 4 is closest in meaning to
taken from
made up of
suggesting
covering
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 4 about Tokyo Bay?
The coastal land currently available is smaller than it was during the Jomon period
The height of raised beaches around Tokyo Bay is a poor indicator of ancient sea levels
The water temperature in Tokyo Bay is lower at present than it was during the Jomon period
Tectonic movement during the Jomon period was not responsible for the formation of Tokyo Bay's raised beaches

Nothing divided the medieval world in Europe more decisively from the Early Modern period than printing with movable type. It was a German invention and the culmination of a complex process. The world of antiquity had recorded its writings mainly on papyrus. Between 200 B.C and A.D 300, this was supplemented by vellum, calf skin treated and then smoothed by pumice stone. To this in late Roman times was added parchment, similarly made from the smoothed skin of sheep or goats. In the early Middle Ages, Europe imported an industrial process from China, which turned almost any kind of fibrous material into pulp that was then spread in sheets. This was known as cloth parchment. By about 1150, the Spanish had developed the first mill for making cheap paper (a word contracted from "papyrus", which became the standard term). One of the most important phenomena of the later Middle Ages was the growing availability of cheap paper. Even in England, where technology lagged far behind, a sheet of paper, or eight octavo pages, cost only a penny by the fifteenth century.
In the years 1446-1448, two German goldsmiths, Johannes Gutenberg and Johann Fust, made use of cheap paper to introduce a critical improvement in the way written pages were reproduced. Printing from wooden blocks was the old method; what the Germans did was to invent movable type for the letterpress. It had three merits: it could be used repeatedly until worn out; it was cast in metal from a mold and so could be renewed without difficulty; and it made lettering uniform. In 1450, Gutenberg began work on his Bible, the first printed book, known as the Gutenberg. It was completed in 1455 and is a marvel. As Gutenberg, apart from getting the key idea, had to solve a lot of practical problems, including imposing paper and ink into the process and the actual printing itself, for which he adapted the screw press used by winemakers, it is amazing that his first product does not look at all rudimentary. Those who handle it are struck by its clarity and quality.
Printing was one of those technical revolutions that developed its own momentum at extraordinary speed. Europe in the fifteenth century was a place where intermediate technology - that is, workshops with skilled craftspeople - was well established and spreading fast, especially in Germany and Italy. Such workshops were able to take on printing easily, and it thus became Europe's first true industry. The process was aided by two factors: the new demand for cheap classical texts and the translation of the Latin Bible into "modern" languages. Works of reference were also in demand. Presses sprang up in several German cities, and by 1470, Nuremberg, Germany had established itself as the center of the international publishing trade, printing books from 24 presses and distributing them at trade fairs all over western and central Europe. The old monastic scriptoria-monastery workshops where monks copied texts by hand-worked closely alongside the new presses, continuing to produce the luxury goods that movable-type printing could not yet supply. Printing, however, was primarily aimed at a cheap mass sale.
Although there was no competition between the technologies, there was rivalry between nations. The Italians made energetic and successful efforts to catch up with Germany. Their most successful scriptorium quickly imported two leading German printers to set up presses in their book-producing shop.  German printers had the disadvantage of working with the complex typeface that the Italians sneeringly referred to as "Gothic" and that later became known as black letter.  Outside Germany, readers found this typeface disagreeable.  The Italians, on the other hand, had a clear typeface known as roman that became the type of the future.  
Hence, although the Germans made use of the paper revolution to introduce movable type, the Italians went far to regain the initiative by their artistry. By 1500 there were printing firms in 60 German cities, but there were 150 presses in Venice alone. However, since many nations and governments wanted their own presses, the trade quickly became international. The cumulative impact of this industrial spread was spectacular. Before printing, only the very largest libraries, of which there were a dozen in Europe, had as many as 600 books. The total number of books on the entire Continent was well under 100,000. But by 1500, after only 45 years of the printed book, there were 9 million in circulation.
 
The word "this" in the passage refers to
parchment
pumice stone
calf skin
papyrus
The word "contracted" in the passage is closest in meaning to
translated
invented
shortened
borrowed
The word "phenomena" in the passage is closest in meaning to
traditions
occurrences
perceptions
consequences
According to paragraph 2, all of the following were advantages of movable metal type EXCEPT
It could be reused
It made letters of standardized size
It did not require specialized skill to use
It could easily be restored from a mold
The word "rudimentary" in the passage is closest in meaning to
primitive
decorative
practical
complicated
In mentioning the screw press, the author is indicating that
gutenberg worked as a winemaker before inventing movable type
the printing industry faced more practical problems than other industry did
the printing and wine-making industries independently developed the same device
gutenberg used a device from an unrelated industry in his printing process
According to the passage, the role of the monastic scriptoria was to
translate old religious texts into modern languages
turn books printed at the new presses into luxury items
produce reference works solely for religious use
create books of a quality that was beyond the means of the printing industry
According to paragraph 3, for whom were printed books mainly produced?
Scholars of language and religion
Buyers who could not afford to purchase hand-copied texts
Artists and craftspeople
Monks living in monasteries
Why does the author mention 24 presses in the discussion?
To indicate the extent to which the printing industry had grown in Germany
To emphasize those printing presses far outnumbered monastic scriptoria
To indicate the importance of trade fairs as a way of promoting printing presses
To argue that the centers of printing had begun to shift from Germany to other parts of Europe
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 4 about the Gothic typeface used in Germany?
It was adopted by the Italians when they hired two leading German printers
It was more difficult to read than roman typeface
It was easier to print than other styles of typeface
It was widely popular with international readers
The word impact in the passage is closest in meaning to
goal
profit
effect
effort
According to paragraph 4 and 5, how did German and Italian contributions to the printing industry differ?
German printers originated and applied a technique that Italian printers adapted more artistically
German printers mass-produced books, while Italian printers produced fewer books of better quality
German printers used only black typeface, while Italian printers used a variety of typeface colors and styles
German printers had greater technological skill, while Italian printers wee more commercially successful

Increases in population have usually been accompanied (indeed facilitated) by an increase in trade. In the Western experience, commerce provided the conditions that allowed industrialization to get started, which in turn led to growth in science, technology, industry, transport, communications, social change, and the like that we group under the broad term of development. However, the massive increase in population that in Europe was at first attributed to industrialization starting in the eighteenth century occurred also and at the same period in China, even though there was no comparable industrialization.
It is estimated that the Chinese population by 1600 was close to 150 million. The transition between the Ming and Qing dynasties (the seventeenth century) may have seen a decline, but from 1741 to 1851 the annual figures rose steadily and spectacularly, perhaps beginning with 143 million and ending with 432 million. If we accept these totals, we are confronted with a situation in which the Chinese population doubled in the 50 years from 1790 to 1840. If, with greater caution, we assume lower totals in the early eighteenth century and only 400 million in 1850, we still face a startling fact: something like a doubling of the vast Chinese population in the century before Western contact, foreign trade, and industrialization could have had much effect.
To explain this sudden increase we cannot point to factors constant in Chinese society but must find conditions or a combination of factors that were newly effective in this period. Among these is the almost complete internal peace maintained under Manchu rule during the eighteenth century. There was also an increase in foreign trade through Guangzhou (southern China) and some improvement of transportation within the empire. Control of disease, like the checking of smallpox by variolation may have been important. But of most critical importance was the food supply.
Confronted with a multitude of unreliable figures, economists have compared the population records with the aggregate data for cultivated land area and grain production in the six centuries since 1368. Assuming that Chinas population in 1400 was about 80 million, the economist Dwight Perkins concludes that its growth to 700 million or more in the 1960s was made possible by a steady increase in the grain supply, which evidently grew five or six times between 1400 and 1800 and rose another 50 percent between 1800 and 1965. This increase of food supply was due perhaps half to the increase of cultivated area, particularly by migration and settlement in the central and western provinces, and half to greater productivity - the farmers success in raising more crops per unit of land.
This technological advance took many forms: one was the continual introduction from the south of earlier-ripening varieties of rice, which made possible double-cropping (the production of two harvests per year from one field).   New crops such as corn (maize) and sweet potatoes as well as peanuts and tobacco were introduced from the Americas.   Corn, for instance, can be grown on the dry soil and marginal hill land of North China, where it is used for food, fuel, and fodder and provides something like one-seventh of the food energy available in the area.   The sweet potato, growing in sandy soil and providing more food energy per unit of land than other crops, became the main food of the poor in much of the South China rice area.  
Productivity in agriculture was also improved by capital investments, first of all in irrigation. From 1400 to 1900 the total of irrigated land seems to have increased almost three times. There was also a gain in farm tools, draft animals, and fertilizer, to say nothing of the population growth itself, which increased half again as fast as cultivated land area and so increased the ratio of human hands available per unit of land. Thus the rising population was fed by a more intensive agriculture, applying more labor and fertilizer to the land.
 
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Commerce, industrialization, and development are common features of the Western experience
Trade, industrialization, and development accelerated social change in Western societies.
Trade and industrialization brought about development in Western societies.
In Western societies, social change provided the conditions for development in a number of areas.
The word attributed in the passage is closest in meaning to
accustomed
credited
exposed
transformed
According to paragraphs 1 and 2, which of the following is true of Chinese population growth between 1741 and 1851?
It coincided with the beginning of industrialization in China
It prompted speculation about the actual number of people living in China in previous centuries
It continued the steady growth in population of previous centuries
It occurred in the absence of certain conditions generally associated with population growth
According to paragraph 2, the estimated population of China in the mid-1700s was?
143 million
150 million
400 million
432 million
The word constant  in the passage is closest in meaning to
unique
dominant
altered
unchanging
Paragraph 3 supports all of the following statements about eighteenth-century Chinese society EXCEPT
It was troubled by frequent conflicts with foreign nations
It improved its transportation system
It experienced growth in international commerce
It managed to prevent the spread of certain diseases
Paragraph 4 answers which of the following questions about Chinas population growth between 1400 and 1965?
Which figures relating to Chinas population growth were unreliable
Why did Dwight Perkins assume that Chinas population in 1400 was about 80 million
Where in China did most of the population increase take place
What factors made Chinas population growth between 1400 and 1965 possible
The word aggregate in the passage is closest in meaning to
available
reliable
combined
recorded
What can be inferred from paragraph 5 about the introduction of corn and sweet potatoes in China?
These crops required much more care than other crops
These crops were consumed in limited quantities
These crops permitted an expansion of the area used for farming
These crops became available all over China within a short period of time
The word ratio in the passage is closest in meaning to
proportion
availability
importance
cost
Which of the following is NOT mentioned in paragraphs 5 and 6 as one of the strategies the Chinese applied in agriculture?
The growing of two crops on the same field during the same year
The improvement of systems to supply crops with water
The application of increasing amounts of fertilizer to the land
The reduction in the amount of human labor per unit of land
What purpose does paragraph 5 serve in the larger discussion about Chinas population growth?
It provides evidence of Chinas emerging foreign trade relations
It illustrates how the Chinese increased their food supply
It provides evidence of why population growth was most noticeable in the south
It shows how foreign crops gradually gained greater acceptance in China

One of the central scientific questions of nineteenth-century geology was the origin of mountains. How were they formed? What process squeezed and folded rocks like bread dough? What made Earth's surface move? Most theories invoked terrestrial contraction as a causal force. It was widely believed that Earth had formed as a hot,incandescent body and had been steadily cooling since the beginning of geological time. Because most materials contract as they cool, it seemed logical to assume that Earth had been contracting as it cooled, too. As it did, its surface would have deformed, producing mountains.
In Europe,Austrian geologist Eduard Suess (1831-1914) popularized the image of Earth as a drying apple: as the planet contracted, its surface wrinkled to accommodate the diminished surface area. Suess assumed that Earths initial crust was continuous but broke apart as the interior shrank. The collapsed portions formed the ocean basins, the remaining elevated portions formed the continents. With continued cooling,the original continents became unstable and collapsed to form the next generation of ocean floor, and what had formerly been ocean now became dry land. Over the course of geological history,there would be a continual interchange of land and sea, a periodic rearrangement of the landmasses.
The interchangeability of continents and oceans explained a number of other perplexing geological observations, such as the presence of marine fossils on land (which had long before puzzled Leonardo da Vinci) and the extensive interleaving of marine and terrestrial sediments in the stratigraphic record. Suess's theory also explained the striking similarities of fossils in parts of Africa and South America. Indeed, in some cases the fossils seemed to be identical,even though they were found thousands of miles apart. These similarities had been recognized since the mid-nineteenth century, but they had been made newly problematic by Darwin's theory of evolution. If plants and animals had evolved independently in different places within diverse environments, then why did they look so similar? Suess explained this conundrum by attributing these similar species to an early geological age when the continents were contiguous in an ancient supercontinent called Gondwanaland.
Suesss theory was widely discussed and to varying degrees accepted in Europe, but in North America geologist James Dwight Dana(1813-1895)had developed a different version of contraction theory. Dana suggested that the continents had formed early in Earth history,when low-temperature minerals such as quartz and feldspar had solidified. Then the globe continued to cool and contract, until the high-temperature minerals such as olivine and pyroxene finally solidifiedon the Moon, to form the lunar craters, on Earth,to form the ocean basins. As contraction continued after Earth was solid, its surface began to deform. The boundaries between continents and oceans were most affected by the pressure, and so mountains began to form along continental margins. With continued contraction came continued deformation, but with the continents and oceans always in the same relative positions. Although Dana's theory was a version of contraction, it came to be known as permanence theory,because it viewed continents and oceans as globally permanent features.
In North America permanence theory was linked to the theory of subsidence (or sinking) of sedimentary basins along continental margins. This idea was developed primarily by paleontologist James Hall (1811-1898), who noted that beneath the forest cover,the Appalachian Mountains of North America were built up of folded layers of shallow-water sedimentary rocks, thousands of feet thick. How did these sequences of shallow-water deposits form? How were they folded and uplifted into mountains? Hall suggested that materials eroded off the continents accumulated in the adjacent marginal basins, causing the basins to subside.  Subsidence allowed more sediment to accumulate,causing more subsidence,until finally the weight of the pile caused the sediments to be heated,converted to rock, and then uplifted into mountains.  Dana modified Hall's view by arguing that thick sedimentary piles were not the cause of subsidence but the result of it.  Either way, the theory provided a concise explanation of how thick sequences of shallow-water rocks could accumulate, but was vague on the question of how they were transformed into mountain belts. 
 
According to paragraph 1, most nineteenth-century theories of mountain formation were based on which of the following ideas?
The heat released at the time of Earth's formation caused rocks to fold.
Earth's surface expanded and stretched because the planet had become hot.
Earth's surface shrank and deformed as the planet cooled over time.
Movements of Earth's surface due to frequent expansion and contraction pushed rocks upward.
For which of the following purposes did Suess use the image of a drying apple?
To show that Earth's crust had to have been continuous at first
To show how the processes that led to the formation of ocean basins differed from those that led to the formation of continents
To prove that Earth's continents and ocean floors were not stable
To explain how Earth's surface wrinkled over a shrunken interior
According to paragraph 3, how did Suess explain the occurrence of similar fossils on various continents?
Continents and oceans exchanged materials,so the fossil record was not unique to a specific region.
Initially the landmasses that make up today's continents were one continuous landmass.
The species associated with these fossils gradually spread across the world's continents.
Coastal terrestrial sediments contained similar fossils across continents.
Why does the author mention Darwin's theory of evolution in the passage?
To explain why fossils in the stratigraphic record seemed to be identical
To indicate that other scientists did not accept Suess's theory of interchangeability
To point out a complication that Suess had to resolve for his theory to be valid
To prove that similar species had existed on different continents at an early geological age
Select the TWO answer choices that mention how Dana's theory about Earth's contraction described in paragraph 4 was different from Suess's theory described in paragraph 2. To receive credit, you must select TWO answers.
According to Dana, continents formed before ocean basins.
According to Dana,continents and ocean basins maintained the same relative positions.
According to Dana, Earth stopped contracting after its surface cooled and became solid.
According to Dana, mountains were formed by the cooling of high-temperature minerals.
The word adjacent in the passage is closest in meaning to
open
extra
deep
nearby
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
The presence of marine fossils on land as well as the distribution of marine and terrestrial sediments had long been a mystery to Leonardo da Vinci.
The interchangeability of the continents and oceans as well as other geological observations had long been a source of confusion.
The continual rearrangement of land and sea provided an explanation for some other mysterious geological observations.
The interchangeability of continents and oceans explained the absence of fossils or sediments in oceans.
According to paragraph 5, which of the following led James Hall to propose a theory of subsidence?
The gradual sinking of the Appalachian Mountains resulting from the forests covering them
The existence of sedimentary basins along continental margins
The apparent subsidence of mountains due to erosion
The notion that the Appalachian Mountains are formed of thick folded layers of sedimentary rock

Determining what extinct dinosaurs ate is difficult, but we can infer some aspects of their dietary preferences. Traditionally, this information has been derived from direct evidence, such as stomach contents, and indirect evidence, such as establishing a correlation between particular body characteristics and diets of living animals and then inferring habits for dinosaurs.
Animals such as house cats and dogs have large, stabbing canine teeth at the front of the mouth and smaller, equally sharp teeth farther back in their jaws. Many of these animals are also armed with sharp claws. The advantage of teeth and claws as predatory tools is obvious. Now consider animals like cows, horses, rabbits, and mice. These animals have flat teeth at the back of the jaw that are analogous to and have the same function as grindstones. Unlike the meat-slicing and stabbing teeth of carnivores, the teeth of these animals grind and shred plant material before digestion.
More clues exist in other parts of the skull. The jaw joint of carnivores such as dogs and cats has the mechanical advantage of being at the same level as the tooth row, allowing the jaws to close with tremendous speed and forcing the upper teeth to occlude against the lower teeth with great precision. In herbivorous animals, rapid jaw closure is less important. Because the flat teeth of herbivores work like grindstones, however, the jaws must move both side to side and front to back. The jaw joints of many advanced herbivores, such as cows, lie at a different level than the tooth row, allowing transverse tearing, shredding, and compression of plant material.  If we extend such observations to extinct dinosaurs, we can infer dietary preferences (such as carnivory and herbivory), even though we cannot determine the exact diet.  The duck-billed dinosaurs known as hadrosaurs are a good example of a group whose jaw joint is below the level of the tooth row, which probably helped them grind up tough, fibrous vegetation.
 Paleontologists would like to be much more specific about a dinosaurs diet than simply differentiating carnivore from herbivore.  This finer level of resolution requires direct fossil evidence of dinosaur meals. Stomach contents are only rarely preserved, but when present, allow us to determine exactly what these animals were eating.
In the stomach contents of specimens of Coelophysis (a small, long-necked dinosaur) are bones from juvenile animals of the same species. At one time, these were thought to represent embryonic animals, suggesting that this small dinosaur gave birth to live young rather than laying eggs. Further research indicated that the small dinosaurs were too large and too well developed to be prehatching young. In addition, the juveniles inside the body cavity were of different sizes. All the evidence points to the conclusion that these are the remains of prey items and that, as an adult, Coelophysis was at least in part a cannibal.
Fossilized stomach contents are not restricted to carnivorous dinosaurs. In a few rare cases, most of them mummies (unusually well preserved specimens), fossilized plant remains have been found inside the body cavity of hadrosaurs. Some paleontologists have argued that these represent stream accumulations rather than final meals. The best known of these cases is the second Edmontosaurus mummy collected by the Sternbergs. In the chest cavity of this specimen, which is housed in the Senckenberg Museum in Germany, are the fossil remains of conifer needles, twigs, seeds, and fruits. Similar finds in Corythosaurus specimens from Alberta, Canada, have also been reported, indicating that at least two kinds of Late Cretaceous hadrosaurs fed on the sorts of tress that are common in todays boreal woodlands.
A second form of direct evidence comes from coprolites (fossilized bodily waste). Several dinosaur fossil localities preserve coprolites. Coprolites yield unequivocal evidence about the dietary habits of dinosaurs. Many parts of plants and animals are extremely resistant to the digestive systems of animals and pass completely through the body with little or no alteration. Study of coprolites has indicated that the diets of some herbivorous dinosaurs were relatively diverse, while other dinosaurs appear to have been specialists, feeding on particular types of plants. The problem with inferring diets from coprolites is the difficulty in accurately associating a particular coprolite with a specific dinosaur.
 
The word Traditionally in the passage is closest in meaning to
typically
naturally
originally
partly
According to paragraph 2, which of the following is true of the teeth of carnivores?
Carnivores teeth for grinding and shredding are located in the front of their jaws
Carnivore teeth are designed to break down food thoroughly before digestion
Carnivores have teeth at the back of their jaws that are as sharp as their front teeth
Carnivores have both sharp teeth for slicing meat and flat teeth for grinding meat
In paragraph 2, the author compares the teeth of cows, horses, rabbits, and mice to grindstones in order to explain
how certain kinds of teeth aid digestion
how the teeth of some familiar mammals differ from those of dinosaurs
why the back teeth of herbivores are larger than those of carnivores
why the back teeth of carnivores are just as sharp as their front teeth
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
The advantage of bringing the upper teeth directly against the lower teeth is a more precise bite
Animals whose jaw joint is at the same level as their teeth can bite quickly and accurately
The location of an animals jaw joint in respect to its teeth determines the speed at which it can close its jaws
The carnivore jaw has the advantage of allowing the upper teeth to move with greater speed and precision than the lower teeth do
The word compression in the passage is closest in meaning to
destruction
crushing
swallowing
removal
According to paragraphs 3 and 4, what can studies of living animals help scientists determine about individual dinosaurs?
How the overall jaw size of a given dinosaur species relates to the type of food the species members ate
Whether a given dinosaur generally ate plants or generally ate meat
How much food a given dinosaur would have needed to eat to remain healthy
How an inadequate diet may have affected a given dinosaurs skull and jaw
According to paragraph 5, all of the following support the claim that the adult Coelophysis sometimes ate young Coelophysis EXCEPT
Juveniles found in the body cavities of adults were too advanced in their development to be embryos
Juveniles of different sizes were found in the body cavity of the same adult
Juveniles found in the body cavities of adults were too large to be embryos
Juveniles found in the body cavities of adults were in unhatched eggs
The word restricted in the passage is closest in meaning to
related
critical
common
limited
What explanation is given in paragraph 7 to support the idea that coprolites are a good source of information about what dinosaurs ate?
They are likely to be preserved because of their resistance to decay
They contain some parts of plants and animals that are unchanged by the digestive process
They are usually found in close proximity to other dinosaur fossils
They are produced by both carnivores and herbivores
The word diverse in the passage is closest in meaning to
healthy
varied
pure
stable
According to paragraph 7, what has the study of coprolites revealed about dinosaur eating habits?
Herbivores consumed much larger quantities of food than other dinosaurs did
The diets of some dinosaurs were limited to relatively few kinds of foods
Some herbivores experienced digestion problems as a result of eating certain plants
The diets of some dinosaurs changed as different plants became available to eat
Which of the following questions is NOT answered in the passage?
Why did paleontologists once believe that Coelophysis gave birth to live young
Why is it unusual for the stomach contents of dinosaurs to be preserved
What are some dinosaurs in which the fossilized remains of plants have been found
What difficulty do scientists face in using coprolites to draw conclusions about dinosaur diet

After the Roman Empires conquest of Britain in the first century A.D., the presence of administrators, merchants, and troops on British soil, along with the natural flow of ideas and goods from the rest of the empire, had an enormous influence on life in the British Isles. Cultural influences were of three types: the bringing of objects, the transfer of craft workers, and the introduction of massive civil architecture. Many objects were not art in even the broadest sense and comprised utilitarian items of clothing, utensils, and equipment. We should not underestimate the social status associated with such mundane possessions which had not previously been available. The flooding of Britain with red-gloss pottery from Gaul (modern-day France), decorated with scenes from Classical mythology, probably brought many into contact with the styles and artistic concepts of the Greco-Roman world for the first time, whether or not the symbolism was understood. Mass-produced goods were accompanied by fewer more aesthetically impressive objects such as statuettes. Such pieces perhaps first came with officials for their own religious worship; others were then acquired by native leaders as diplomatic gifts or by purchase. Once seen by the natives, such objects created a fashion which rapidly spread through the province.
In the most extreme instances, natives literally bought the whole package of Roman culture. The Fishbourne villa, built in the third quarter of the first century A.D., probably for the native client king Cogidubnus, amply illustrates his Roman pretensions. It was constructed in the latest Italian style with imported marbles and stylish mosaics. It was lavishly furnished with imported sculptures and other Classical objects. A visitor from Rome would have recognized its owner as a participant in the contemporary culture of the empire, not at all provincial in taste. Even if those from the traditional families looked down on him, they would have been unable to dismiss him as uncultured. Although exceptional, this demonstrates how new cultural symbols bound provincials to the identify of the Roman world.
Such examples established a standard to be copied. One result was an influx of craft worker, particularly those skilled in artistic media like stone-carving which had not existed before the conquest. Civilian workers came mostly from Gaul and Germany. The magnificent temple built beside the sacred spring at Bath was constructed only about twenty years after the conquest. Its detail shows that it was carved by artists from northeast Gaul. In the absence of a tradition of Classical stone-carving and building, the desire to develop Roman amenities would have been difficult to fulfill. Administrators thus used their personal contacts to put the Britons in touch with architects and masons. As many of the officials in Britain had strong links with Gaul, it is not surprising that early Roman Britain owes much to craft workers from that area. Local workshops did develop and stylistically similar groups of sculpture show how skills in this new medium became widespread. Likewise skills in the use of mosaic, wall painting, ceramic decoration, and metal-working developed throughout the province with the eventual emergence of characteristically Romano-British styles.
This art had a major impact on the native peoples, and one of the most importance factors was a change in the scale of buildings. Pre-Roman Britain was highly localized, with people rarely traveling beyond their own region. On occasion large groups amassed for war or religious festivals, but society remained centered on small communities. Architecture of this era reflected this with even the largest of the fortified towns and hill forts containing no more than clusters of medium-sized structures. The spaces inside even the largest roundhouses were modest, and the use of rounded shapes and organic building materials gave buildings a human scale.  But the effect of Roman civil architecture was significant;the sheer size of space enclosed within buildings like the basilica of London must have been astonishing.  This was an architecture of dominance in which subject peoples were literally made to feel small by buildings that epitomized imperial power.  Supremacy was accentuated by the unyielding straight lines of both individual buildings and planned settlements since these too provided a marked contrast with the natural curvilinear shapes dominant in the native realm. 
 
The word mundane in the passage is closest in meaning to
material
ordinary
valued
useful
Paragraph 1 suggests that one benefit for British natives in buying such items as red-gloss pottery made in Gaul was
improved quality of utilitarian items
Understanding the symbolism of Classical mythology
higher social standing
Learning to mass-produce pottery for a profit
Paragraph 1 supports which of the following ideas about contacts that existed between Britain and the Roman Empire before the Roman conquest of Britain?
They were sufficient for native Britons to become familiar with everyday Roman objects.
They were not sufficient for even very basic aspects of the culture of the Roman Empire to find their way into British life.
They were not sufficient for British to have heard of the power of the Roman Empire.
They were sufficient for individual Britons to become very interested in trying to participate in the culture of the Roman Empire.
The word lavishly in the passage is closest in meaning to
exclusively
additionally
appropriately
richly
According to paragraph 2, the style and furnishings of the Fishbourne villa suggest that the person for whom it was built was
cultured according to the contemporary standards of the empire
caught between native and Roman traditions
originally a visitor from Rome
a member of a socially inferior family
The word sacred in the passage is closest in meaning to
holy
ancient
natural
Secret
According to paragraph 3, one factor contributing to success of the earliest Roman-style construction projects in Britain was
the fact that long before the conquest many civilian workers from Gaul and Germany had settled in Britain
the rapid development of characteristically Romano-British styles
the availability, in northeast Gaul, of structures that could serve as standards to be copied
the use, by administrators, of personal connections to bring craft workers form Gaul into contact with Britons
In paragraph 4, why does the author mention that Pre-Roman Britain was highly localized, with people rarely traveling beyond their own region?
To suggest that the Roman conquest of Britain increased the standard of living for natives
To indicate that pre-Roman Britain was more interested in festivals and community life than conquering other regions
To explain why architecture during this period was not built to be particularly large
To illustrate how the traditional roundhouse evolved under the influence of Roman civil architecture
The word modest in the passage in closest in meaning to
comfortable
limited in number
poorly lit
not large
According to paragraph 4, people in pre-Roman Britain lived, for the most part, in
architecture that seemed imperial in size
small communities
large roundhouses
fortified towns
According to paragraph 4, why did straight lines in buildings and settlements emphasize the dominance of those who introduced them ?
Because straight lines were in contrast to the shapes found in pre-Roman architecture
Because unlike curved lines, which are shaped in all sorts of different ways, straight lines do no differ
Because the dominant lines in entire settlements were the same as those in individual buildings
Because building and settlements were easier to construct when the dominant lines were straight lines
According to paragraph 4, buildings from the pre-Roman period differed sharply from buildings reflection Roman civil architecture in each of the following respects EXCEPT
their outside and inside dimensions
the impact they had on people
the geometric shapes in which they were built
the positioning of buildings in clusters

Termites, social insects which live in colonies that, in some species, contain 2 million individuals or more, are often incorrectly referred to as white ants. But they are certainly not ants. Termites, unlike ants, have gradual metamorphosis with only three life stage: egg, nymph, and adult. Ants and the other social members of their order, certain bees and wasps, have complete metamorphosis in four life stages; egg, larva, pupa, and adult. The worker and soldier castes of social ants, bees, and wasps consist of only females, all daughters of a single queen that mated soon after she matured and thereafter never mated again. The worker and soldier castes of termites consist of both males and females, and the queen lives permanently with a male consort.
Since termites are small and soft-bodied, they easily become desiccated and must live in moist places with a high relative humidity. They do best when the relative humidity in their nest is above 96 percent and the temperature is fairly high, an optimum of about 79F for temperate zone species and about 86F for tropical species. Subterranean termites, the destructive species that occurs commonly throughout the eastern United States, attain these conditions by nesting in moist soil that is in contact with wood, their only food. The surrounding soil keeps the nest moist and tends to keep the temperature at a more or less favorable level. When it is cold in winter, subterranean termites move to burrows below the frost line.
Some tropical termites are more ingenious engineers, constructing huge above-ground nests with built-in air conditioning that keeps the nest moist, at a constant temperature, and well supplied with oxygen. Among the most architecturally advanced of these termites is an African species, Macrotermes natalensis. Renowned Swiss entomologist Martin Luscher described the mounds of this fungus-growing species as being as much as 16 feet tall, 16 feet in diameter at their base, and with a cement-like wall of soil mixed with termite saliva that is from 16 to 23 inches thick. The thick and dense wall of the mound insulates the interior microclimate from the variations in humidity and temperature of the outside atmosphere. Several narrow and relatively thin-walled ridges on the outside of the mound extend from near its base almost to its top.
According to Luscher, a medium-sized nest of Macrotermes has a population of about 2 million individuals. The metabolism of so many termites and of the fungus that they grow in their gardens as food helps keep the interior of the nest warm and supplies some moisture to the air in the nest. The termites saturate the atmosphere of the nest, bringing it to about 100 percent relative humidity, by carrying water up from the soil.
But how is this well-insulated nest ventilated? Its many occupants require over 250 quarts of oxygen (more than 1,200 quarts of air) per day. How can so much oxygen diffuse through the thick walls of the mound?  Even the pores in the wall are filled with water, which almost stops the diffusion of gases.  The answer lies in the construction of the nest.  The interior consists of a large central core in which the fungus is grown, below it is cellar of empty space, above it is an attic of empty space, and within the ridges on the outer wall of the nest, there are many small tunnels that connect the cellar and the attic.  The warm air in the fungus gardens rises through the nest up to the attic. From the attic, the air passes into the tunnels in the ridges and flows back down to the cellar. Gases, mainly oxygen coming in and carbon dioxide going out, easily diffuse into or out of the ridges, since their walls are thin and their surface area is large because they protrude far out from the wall of the mound. Thus air that flows down into the cellar through the ridges is relatively rich in oxygen, and has lost much of its carbon dioxide. It supplies the nests inhabitants with fresh oxygen as it rises through the fungus-growing area back up to the attic.
 
The author mentions white ants in the beginning of the passage in order to
correct a common misunderstanding about termites
introduce the idea that termites only take the form of ants during certain life stages
argue that not all white ants are social insects
Illustrate the large variety of insect species that live in colonies
According to paragraph 1, which of the following is true about termites?
They are a kind of ant, but they are unlike most ants in many ways.
They form colonies that grow at first and then gradually decline.
Their workers are all males, and their soldiers are all females.
They go through a life state called the nymph stage.
According to paragraph 2, termites need to live in nests with high humidity in order to
keep their food moist
withstand cold temperatures in winter
protect their bodies from drying out
keep nest temperatures high
The word attain in the passage is closest in meaning to
achieve
observe
overcome
reflect
The word ingenious in the passage is closest in meaning to
determined
clever
ambitious
successful
The word Renowned in the passage is closest in meaning to
Skilled
Famous
Early
Revolutionary
According to paragraph 3, the nests of some tropical termite species have the ability to
insulate the microclimate in one part of the nest from the microclimate in another part
Allow moist outside air to get inside regardless of whether it is warm or cool
rapidly decrease the humidity inside when it gets hot outside
Provide the oxygen needed in the nest
According to paragraphs 3 and 4, all of the following are true of the nests of Macrotermes natalensis EXCEPT:
The walls are built out of soil mixed with termite saliva.
The nests can be as tall as they are wide at the base.
The interior of the nest is kept as humid as possible.
The termites use hollow, thin-walled ridges to travel from one part of the nest to another.
According to paragraph 4, how does the fungus grown by Macrotermes natalensis affect the environment of the nest?
It carries water up from the soil into the interior.
It dries the air by using up moisture as it grows.
It heats and adds humidity to the inside of the nest.
It lessens the effects of the metabolism of so many termites.
According to paragraph 5, what does the thinness of the ridge walls make possible?
The concentration of cool air in the cellar
The construction of exceptionally long tunnels
The even distribution of oxygen from attic to cellar
The diffusion of gases into and out of the ridges
According to paragraph 5, what happens to the air in the ridge tunnels of Macrotermes natalensis nests?
It becomes more humid as water vapor diffuses into the tunnels.
It loses carbon dioxide and gains oxygen.
It reaches the interior of the nest through pores in the walls.
It moves in the same direction as the air in the center of the nest.
Paragraph 5 supports which of the following about the air that flows through the interior of a Macrotermes natalensis mound?
It has a higher concentration of oxygen in the cellar than in the attic.
It is the same temperature as the air on the outside of the mound.
It contains over 250 quarts of oxygen which circulate continuously.
It is most humid in the cellar and gradually loses moisture as it rises to the attic.

Evidence suggests that an important stimulus behind the rise of early civilizations was the development of settled agriculture, which unleashed a series of changes in the organization of human communities that culminated in the rise of large ancient empires.
The exact time and place that crops were first cultivated successfully is uncertain. Many prehistorians believe that farming may have emerged in dependently in several different areas of the world when small communities, driven by increasing population and a decline in available food resources, began to plant seeds in the ground in an effort to guarantee their survival. The first farmers, who may have lived as long as 10,000 years ago, undoubtedly used simple techniques and still relied primarily on other forms of food production, such as hunting, foraging, or pastoralism. The real breakthrough took place when farmers began to cultivate crops along the floodplains of river systems. The advantage was that crops grown in such areas were not as dependent on rainfall and therefore produced a more reliable harvest. An additional benefit was that the sediment carried by the river waters deposited nutrients in the soil, thus enabling the farmer to cultivate a single plot of ground for many years without moving to a new location. Thus, the first truly sedentary (that is, nonmigratory) societies were born. As time went on, such communities gradually learned how to direct the flow of water to enhance the productive capacity of the land, while the introduction of the iron plow eventually led to the cultivation of heavy soils not previously susceptible to agriculture.
The spread of this river valley agriculture in various parts of Asia and Africa was the decisive factor in the rise of the first civilizations. The increase in food production in these regions led to a significant growth in population, while efforts to control the flow of water to maximize the irrigation of cultivated areas and to protect the local inhabitants from hostile forces outside the community provoked the first steps toward cooperative activities on a large scale. The need to oversee the entire process brought about the emergence of an elite that was eventually transformed into a government.
The first clear steps in the rise of the first civilizations took place in the fourth and third millennia B.C. in Mesopotamia, northern Africa, India, and China. How the first governments took shape in these areas is not certain, but anthropologists studying the evolution of human communities in various parts of the world have discovered that one common stage in the process is the emergence of what are called big men within a single village or a collection of villages. By means of their military prowess, dominant personalities, or political talents, these people gradually emerge as the leaders of that community. In time, the big men become formal symbols of authority and pass on that authority to others within their own family. As the communities continue to grow in size and material wealth, the big men assume hereditary status, and their allies and family members are transformed into a hereditary monarchy.
The appearance of these sedentary societies had a major impact on the social organizations, religious beliefs, and way of life of the peoples living within their boundaries.  With the increase in population and the development of centralized authority came the emergence of the cities.  While some of these urban centers were identified with a particular economic function, such as proximity to gold or iron deposits or a strategic location on a major trade route, others served primarily as administrative centers or the site of temples for the official cult or other ritual observances. Within these cities, new forms of livelihood appeared to satisfy the growing need for social services and consumer goods. Some people became artisans or merchants, while others became warriors, scholars, or priests. In some cases, the physical division within the first cities reflected the strict hierarchical character of the society as a whole, with a royal palace surrounded by an imposing wall and separate from the remainder of the urban population. In other instances, such as the Indus River Valley, the cities lacked a royal precinct and the ostentatious palaces that marked their contemporaries elsewhere.
 
The phrase culminated in in the passage is closest in meaning to
reached a high point with
logically followed from
partly contributed to
marked
According to paragraph 2, which of the following statements is true of early farmers?
They used farming to supplement other food sources.
They were driven out of small communities.
They were victims of flooding.
They farmed several plots of land at once.
The word undoubtedly in the passage is closest in meaning to
increasingly
certainly
in general
apparently
According to paragraph 2, what are TWO reasons why farmers chose river valleys for cultivation? To receive credit you must select TWO answer choices.
The soils in river valleys were rich in nutrients.
The crops grown in river valleys were not completely dependent on rainwater.
Farming techniques could not be easily applied to soils far from rivers.
The heavier weight of river soil resulted in more reliable harvests.
The word enhance in the passage is closest in meaning to
serve
improve
control
protect
The word provoked in the passage is closest in meaning to
secured
coordinated
modeled
brought about
According to paragraph 3, which of the following is NOT a reason why governments first arose among agricultural communities?
A significant increase in population
The desire to control water resources for irrigation
The need for protection from outside forces
The demand for organized communication with other communities
According to paragraph 4, what is not known about the rise of the first civilizations?
Where the first steps toward civilization took place
Who was allowed to replace big men after the big men died
Why some individuals became recognized as leaders
How governments emerged
What is the relationship between paragraphs 3 and 4 in the passage?
Paragraph 3 explains why a need for leadership arose in early civilizations, and paragraph 4 describes how that leadership developed.
Paragraph 3 suggests that agriculture was first practiced in Asia and Africa, and paragraph 4 discusses how it might have later spread to the rest of the world.
Paragraph 3 describes several methods of early government, and paragraph 4 gives an extended example of one of them.
Paragraph 3 discusses a cause of the spread of river valley agriculture in early civilizations, and paragraph 4 discusses an effect.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Some cities were associated with economic activities, while others were government or religious centers.
Emerging cities generally served strategic administrative, economic, and religious purposes.
The creation of an economic or administrative activity led to the emergence of a city for its proper supervision.
Some cities emerged as economic centers and later became the sites of administrative or religious activities.
Paragraph 5 suggests that which of the following was a consequence of the emergence of cities?
The decentralization of authority
An increase in religious activity
The emergence of service- and production-related jobs
A decreased reliance on mineral resources
According to paragraph 5, why were huge walls built around early royal palaces?
To protect the inhabitants from invaders
To mark the urban areas
To separate the ruling class from the rest of the population
To represent the prosperity of a city

An important environment that is more or less totally restricted to the intertropical zone is the coral reef. Coral reefs are found where the ocean water temperature is not less than 21 C, where there is a firm substratum, and where the seawater is not rendered too dark by excessive amounts of river-borne sediment. They will not grow in very deep water, so a platform within 30 to 40 meters of the surface is a necessary prerequisite for their development. Their physical structure is dominated by the skeletons of corals, which are carnivorous animals living off zooplankton. However, in addition to corals there are enormous quantities of algae, some calcareous, which help to build the reefs. The size of reefs is variable. Some atolls are very largeKwajelein in the Marshall Islands of the South Pacific is 120 kilometers long and as much as 24 kilometers across-but most are very much smaller, and rise only a few meters above the water. The 2,000-kilometer complex of reefs known as the Great Barrier Reef, which forms a gigantic natural breakwater off the northeast coast of Australia, is by far the greatest coral structure on Earth.
Coral reefs have fascinated scientists for almost 200 years, and some of the most pertinent observations of them were made in the 1830s by Charles Darwin on the voyage of the Beagle. He recognized that there were three major kinds: fringing reefs, barrier reefs, and atolls; and he saw that they were related to each other in a logical and gradational sequence. A fringing reef is one that lies close to the shore of some continent or island. Its surface forms an uneven and rather rough platform around the coast, about the level of low water, and its outer edge slopes downwards into the sea. Between the fringing reef and the land there is sometimes a small channel or lagoon. When the lagoon is wide and deep and the reef lies at some distance from the shore and rises from deep water it is called a barrier reef. An atoll is a reef in the form of a ring or horseshoe with a lagoon in the center.
Darwin s theory was that the succession from one coral reef type to another could be achieved by the upward growth of coral from a sinking platform, and that there would be a progression from a fringing reef, through the barrier reef stage until, with the disappearance through subsidence (sinking) of the central island, only a reef-enclosed lagoon or atoll would survive. A long time after Darwin put forward this theory, some deep boreholes were drilled in the Pacific atolls in the 1950s. The drill holes passed through more than a thousand meters of coral before reaching the rock substratum of the ocean floor, and indicated that the coral had been growing upward for tens of millions of years as Earth's crust subsided at a rate of between 15 and 51 meters per million years. Darwin s theory was therefore proved basically correct. There are some submarine islands called guyots and seamounts, in which subsidence associated with sea-floor spreading has been too speedy for coral growth to keep up.
Like mangrove swamps, coral reefs are extremely important habitats. Their diversity of coral genera is greatest in the warm waters of the Indian Ocean and the western Pacific.  Indeed, they have been called the marine version of the tropical rain forest, rivaling their terrestrial counterparts in both richness of species and biological productivity.  They also have significance because they provide coastal protection, opportunities for recreation, and are potential sources of substances like medicinal drugs.  At present they are coming under a variety of threats, of which two of the most important are dredging and the effects of increased siltation brought about by accelerated erosion from neighboring land areas. 
 
According to paragraph 1, all of the following are needed for the growth of coral reefs EXCEPT
a solid base to grow on
exposure to light
the presence of river-borne sediment
ocean temperatures of 21 C or higher
the word prerequisite in the passage is closest in meaning to
precaution
preparation
requirement
achievement
According to paragraph 1, algae are important because
they help build coral reefs
they are the dominant type of sea life living on the reefs
they compete with coral for zooplankton
they are an important source of food available to corals
The word complex in the passage is closest in meaning to?
extension
system
region
variety
According to paragraph 2, how did Charles Darwin contribute to the understanding of coral reefs?
He identified the main types of coral reef and explained how they were related.
He discovered the existence of coral reefs on a scientific voyage.
He proved that reefs are mostly located very close to the shore.
He saw the importance of reefs for the support of other marine life.
The word pertinent in the passage is closest in meaning to
extraordinary
relevant
intelligent
famous
According to paragraph 2, which of the following is NOT characteristics of a barrier reef?
It is located away from the shore of the neighboring land.
It is separated from neighboring land by a wide channel.
It is located in deep ocean water.
It surrounds a small, central lagoon.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Darwin claimed that, of the three types of coral reefs, only an atoll would be able to survive on a sinking platform.
Darwin recognized that coral reefs achieved success by growing upward from a sinking land platform and becoming an atoll.
Darwin argued that as a coral reef grew up from a sinking island, it would become a fringing reef, then a barrier reef, and finally, with the disappearance of the island, an atoll.
Darwins theory helped explain the disappearance of a number of islands by showing how coral reef growth caused them to sink below the ocean surface.
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 3 about the Pacific atolls?
They were once fringing reefs around the coasts of islands.
They were first observed by Darwin during his voyage on the Beagle.
They will eventually become fringing reefs.
They are located where the ocean floor does not sink.
Why does the passage provide the information that the drill holes in the Pacific atolls passed through more than a thousand meters of coral before reaching the rock substratum of the ocean floor?
To emphasize that according to Darwins view coral can grow at great depths
To indicate how scientists knew the rate at which Earths crust had subsided
To support the claim that coral reefs take millions of years to form
To present the evidence that confirmed Darwins account of coral reef evolution
According to paragraph 4, why have coral reefs been compared to tropical rain forests?
Both are located near the Indian and western Pacific Oceans.
Both are home to a wide variety of species
Both play an important role in protecting coastal islands.
Both are threatened by the erosion of nearby land.
The word potential in the passage is closest in meaning to
powerful
possible
valuable
reliable

It was in Egypt and Mesopotamia (modern-day Iraq) that civilization arose, and it is there that we find the earliest examples of that key feature of civilization, writing. These examples, in the form of inscribed clay tablets that date to shortly before 3000 B.C.E., have been discovered among the archaeological remains of the Sumerians, a gifted people settled in southern Mesopotamia.
The Egyptians were not far behind in developing writing, but we cannot follow the history of their writing in detail because they used a perishable writing material. In ancient times the banks of the Nile were lined with papyrus plants, and from the papyrus reeds the Egyptians made a form of paper; it was excellent in quality but, like any paper, fragile. Mesopotamias rivers boasted no such useful reeds, but its land did provide good clay, and as a consequence the clay tablet became the standard material. Though clumsy and bulky it has a virtue dear to archaeologists: it is durable. Fire, for example, which is death to papyrus paper or other writing materials such as leather and wood, simply bakes it hard, thereby making it even more durable. So when a conqueror set a Mesopotamian palace ablaze, he helped ensure the survival of any clay tablets in it. Clay, moreover, is cheap, and forming it into tablets is easy, factors that helped the clay tablet become the preferred writing material not only throughout Mesopotamia but far outside it as well, in Syria, Asia Minor, Persia, and even for a while in Crete and Greece. Excavators have unearthed clay tablets in all these lands. In the Near East they remained in use for more than two and a half millennia, and in certain areas they lasted down to the beginning of the common era until finally yielding, once and for all, to more convenient alternatives.
The Sumerians perfected a style of writing suited to clay. This script consists of simple shapes, basically just wedge shapes and lines that could easily be incised in soft clay with a reed or wooden stylus; scholars have dubbed it cuneiform from the wedge-shaped marks (cunei in Latin) that are its hallmark. Although the ingredients are merely wedges and lines, there are hundreds of combinations of these basic forms that stand for different sounds or words. Learning these complex signs required long training and much practice; inevitably, literacy was largely limited to a small professional class, the scribes.
The Akkadians conquered the Sumerians around the middle of the third millennium B.C.E., and they took over the various cuneiform signs used for writing Sumerian and gave them sound and word values that fit their own language.  The Babylonians and Assyrians did the same, and so did peoples in Syria and Asia Minor.  The literature of the Sumerians was treasured throughout the Near East, and long after Sumerian ceased to be spoken, the Babylonians and Assyrians and others kept it alive as a literary language, the way Europeans kept Latin alive after the fall of Rome.  For the scribes of these non-Sumerian languages, training was doubly demanding since they had to know the values of the various cuneiform signs for Sumerian as well as for their own language. 
The contents of the earliest clay tablets are simple notations of numbers of commoditiesanimals, jars, baskets, etc. Writing, it would appear, started as a primitive form of bookkeeping. Its use soon widened to document the multitudinous things and acts that are involved in daily life, from simple inventories of commodities to complicated governmental rules and regulations.
Archaeologists frequently find clay tablets in batches. The batches, some of which contain thousands of tablets, consist for the most part of documents of the types just mentioned: bills, deliveries, receipts, inventories, loans, marriage contracts, divorce settlements, court judgments, and so on. These records of factual matters were kept in storage to be available for reference-they were, in effect, files, or, to use the term preferred by specialists in the ancient Near East, archives. Now and then these files include pieces of writing that are of a distinctly different order, writings that do not merely record some matter of fact but involve creative intellectual activity. They range from simple textbook material to literature-and they make an appearance very early, even from the third millennium B C E.
 
The word key in the passage is closest in meaning to
frequent
essential
original
familiar
The word virtue in the passage is closest in meaning to
price
design
desirable quality
physical characteristic
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
In part because of its low cost and ease of use, clay became the preferred writing material throughout Mesopotamia and well beyond it.
Clay was cheap throughout Mesopotamia, so clay tablets from Mesopotamia became the preferred writing material as far as the Mediterranean.
For a while, the clay tablet was the preferred writing material in Crete and Greece.
Moreover, because clay was used as the writing material of choice in Mesopotamia, Syria, Asia Minor, Persia, and the Mediterranean, it was cheap and popular.
What can be inferred from paragraph 2 about clay as a writing material?
It had to be baked before it could be written on.
Its good points outweighed its bad points.
Its durability was its most important feature for its users.
It was not available in Egypt.
In paragraph 2, why does the author discuss the Egyptian use of papyrus as a writing material?
To describe the superiority of papyrus over leather and wood as a writing material
To explain why writing in Egypt did not develop as quickly as it did Mesopotamia
To explain why archaeologists' knowledge of the early history of writing relies mainly on Sumerian cuneiform
To explain why the Sumerians preferred clay tablets for writing over papyrus
According to paragraph 3, all of the following are true of cuneiform writing EXCEPT:
It was composed of very simple shapes.
It was perfected by the ancient Sumerians.
It influenced the choice of material on which it was written.
It was understood by very few Sumerians.
According to paragraph 4, how did the Akkadians use the Sumerian language?
They used Sumerian for speaking but used their own national language for writing.
They used the complex cuneiform signs developed by the Babylonians and Assyrians rather than the Sumerian signs.
They developed their own cuneiform shapes on clay tablets to replace those used by the Sumerians.
They assigned new sound and word values to the signs of Sumerian cuneiform.
Paragraph 4 answers all the following questions about Sumerian writing in the period after the Sumerians were conquered EXCEPT:
Did Sumerian literature continue to be read?
Did Sumerian continue to be spoken?
Did scribes compose new texts in Sumerian?
Did Sumerian have the same fate as Latin had after the fall of Rome?
The word "document" in the passage is closest in meaning to
include
influence
organize
record
According to paragraph 5, writing was first used for
simple bookkeeping
descriptions of daily events
counting the contents of clay tablets
government reports
The phrase Now and then in the passage is closest in meaning to
always
occasionally
sooner or later
first and last
According to paragraph 6, large batches of clay writing tablets were stored because the tablets
were being produced quickly and in large quantities
did not serve any practical purpose for most Mesopotamians
contained information that needed to be available for future reference
could not be used again once they had been written on

Beginning in the 1160s, the opening of new silver mines in northern Europe led to the minting and circulation of vast quantities of silver coins. The widespread use of cash greatly increased the volume of international trade. Business procedures changed radically. The individual traveling merchant who alone handled virtually all aspects of exchange evolved into an operation involving three separate types of merchants: the sedentary merchant who ran the "home office" financing and organizing the firm's entire export-import trade; the carriers who transported goods by land and sea; and the company agents resident in cities abroad who, on the advice of the home office, looked after sales and procurements.
Commercial correspondence, unnecessary when one businessperson oversaw everything and made direct bargains with buyers and sellers, multiplied. Regular courier service among commercial cities began. Commercial accounting became more complex when firms had to deal with shareholders, manufacturers, customers, branch offices, employees, and competing firms. Tolls on roads became high enough to finance what has been called a road revolution, involving new surfaces and bridges, new passes through the Alps, and new inns and hospices for travelers. The growth of mutual trust among merchants facilitated the growth of sales on credit and led to new developments in finance, such as the bill of exchange, a device that made the long, slow, and very dangerous shipment of coins unnecessary.
The ventures of the German Hanseatic League illustrate these advancements. The Hanseatic League was a mercantile association of European towns dating from 1159.  The league grew by the end of the fourteenth century to include about 200 cities from Holland to Poland.  Across regular, well- defined trade routes along the Baltic and North seas, the ships of league cities carried furs, wax, copper, fish, grain, timber, and wine.  These goods were exchanged for finished products, mainly cloth and salt, from western cities.  At cities such as Bruges and London, Hanseatic merchants secured special trading concessions, exempting them from all tolls and allowing them to trade at local fairs. Hanseatic merchants established foreign trading centers, the most famous of which was the London Steelyard, a walled community with warehouses, offices, a church, and residential quarters for company representatives. By the late thirteenth century, Hanseatic merchants had developed an important business technique, the business register. Merchants publicly recorded their debts and contracts and received a league guarantee for them. This device proved a decisive factor in the later development of credit and commerce in northern Europe.
These developments added up to what one modern scholar has called "a commercial revolution." In the long run, the commercial revolution of the High Middle Ages (a d 1000-1300) brought about radical change in European society. One remarkable aspect of this change was that the commercial classes constituted a small part of the total populationnever more than 10 percent. They exercised an influence far in excess of their numbers. The commercial revolution created a great deal of new wealth, which meant a higher standard of living. The existence of wealth did not escape the attention of kings and other rulers. Wealth could be taxed, and through taxation, kings could create strong and centralized states. In the years to come, alliances with the middle classes were to enable kings to weaken aristocratic interests and build the states that came to be called modern.
The commercial revolution also provided the opportunity for thousands of agricultural workers to improve their social position. The slow but steady transformation of European society from almost completely rural and isolated to relatively more urban constituted the greatest effect of the commercial revolution that began in the eleventh century. Even so, merchants and business people did not run medieval communities, except in central and northern Italy and in the county of Flanders. Most towns remained small. The nobility and churchmen determined the predominant social attitudes, values, and patterns of thought and behavior. The commercial changes of the eleventh through fourteenth centuries did however, lay the economic foundation for the development of urban life and culture.
 
According to paragraph 1, one effect of the increased use of cash was that
an individual merchant no longer performed all aspects of trading operations
a company's home office declined in importance
merchants no longer had to transport their goods to distant places
the volume of trade declined in areas lacking silver mines
The word "radically" in the passage is closest in meaning to
fundamentally
quickly
unexpectedly
gradually
The word "oversaw" in the passage is closest in meaning to
understood
included
delivered
supervised
According to paragraph 2, which of the following was NOT an effect of the change in business procedures?
An increase in credit sales
The use of courier services between cities
The adoption of simpler accounting procedures
The improvement of roads
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Credit sales and bills of exchange were devices that merchants developed in order to increase their mutual trust.
Merchants developed ways to finance their sales without having to rely on slow and dangerous shipments of coins.
Greater trust among merchants led to an increase in credit sales and to the use of bills of exchange that made the shipping of coins unnecessary.
Merchants began to trust one another when it became too slow and dangerous for a single merchant to ship coins.
According to paragraph 3, Hanseatic merchants benefited by all of the following EXCEPT
the use of trading centers in distant cities
a new system of recording commercial transactions
the opening of overland trade routes across northern Europe
access to markets in about 200 cities
The word "decisive" in the passage is closest in meaning to
probable
determining
helpful
limiting
Why does the author provide the information in paragraph 4 that the commercial classes never exceeded 10 percent of the population?
To argue that the wealth created by the commercial revolution benefited only a small number of people
To challenge the view that the commercial classes made up a majority of the population of Europe
To suggest a reason that the commercial revolution ended around A. D. 1300
To emphasize the point that the commercial revolution was brought about by a small part of the population
According to paragraph 4, which of the following was associated with the rise of modern states?
Increased wealth for the ruling classes
The weakening of the aristocracy
The decline of the middle class
A reduction in taxes
The word "alliances" in the passage is closest in meaning to
transactions
communications
partnerships
conflicts
According to paragraph 5, the most important result of the commercial revolution was to
simplify the organization of European society
provide employment to agricultural workers
encourage merchants to become community leaders
change Europe from a rural to a more urban society
Paragraph 5 supports which of the following inferences about the commercial revolution between ad 1000 and 1300?
It had very little impact on social attitudes and values.
It brought about major political changes throughout Europe.
It lessened the influence of the church.
It increased the population of small towns.

During the peak of the last ice age, northeast Asia (Siberia) and Alaska were connected by a broad land mass called the Bering Land Bridge. This land bridge existed because so much of Earths water was frozen in the great ice sheets that sea levels were over 100 meters lower than they are today. Between 25,000 and 10,000 years ago, Siberia, the Bering Land Bridge, and Alaska shared many environmental characteristics. These included a common mammalian fauna of large mammals, a common flora composed of broad grasslands as well as wind-swept dunes and tundra, and a common climate with cold, dry winters and somewhat warmer summers. The recognition that many aspects of the modern flora and fauna were present on both sides of the Bering Sea as remnants of the ice-age landscape led to this region being named Beringia.
It is through Beringia that small groups of large mammal hunters, slowly expanding their hunting territories, eventually colonized North and South America. On this archaeologists generally agree, but that is where the agreement stops. One broad area of disagreement in explaining the peopling of the Americas is the domain of paleoecologists, but it is critical to understanding human history: what was Beringia like?
The Beringian landscape was very different from what it is today.  Broad, windswept valleys; glaciated mountains; sparse vegetation; and less moisture created a rather forbidding land mass.  This land mass supported herds of now-extinct species of mammoth, bison, and horse and somewhat modern versions of caribou, musk ox, elk, and saiga antelope.  These grazers supported in turn a number of impressive carnivores, including the giant short-faced bear, the saber-tooth cat, and a large species of lion. 
The presence of mammal species that require grassland vegetation has led Arctic biologist Dale Guthrie to argue that while cold and dry, there must have been broad areas of dense vegetation to support herds of mammoth, horse, and bison. Further, nearly all of the ice-age fauna had teeth that indicate an adaptation to grasses and sedges; they could not have been supported by a modern flora of mosses and lichens. Guthrie has also demonstrated that the landscape must have been subject to intense and continuous winds, especially in winter. He makes this argument based on the anatomy of horse and bison, which do not have the ability to search for food through deep snow cover. They need landscapes with strong winds that remove the winter snows, exposing the dry grasses beneath. Guthrie applied the term  mammoth steppe" to characterize this landscape.
In contrast, Paul Colinvaux has offered a counterargument based on the analysis of pollen in lake sediments dating to the last ice age. He found that the amount of pollen recovered in these sediments is so low that the Beringian landscape during the peak of the last glaciation was more likely to have been what he termed a "polar desert," with little or only sparse vegetation, in no way was it possible that this region could have supported large herds of mammals and thus, human hunters. Guthrie has argued against this view by pointing out that radiocarbon analysis of mammoth, horse, and bison bones from Beringian deposits revealed that the bones date to the period of most intense glaciation.
The argument seemed to be at a standstill until a number of recent studies resulted in a spectacular suite of new finds. The first was the discovery of a 1,000-square-kilometer preserved patch of Beringian vegetation dating to just over 17,000 years agothe peak of the last ice age. The plants were preserved under a thick ash fall from a volcanic eruption. Investigations of the plants found grasses, sedges, mosses, and many other varieties in a nearly continuous cover, as was predicted by Guthrie. But this vegetation had a thin root mat with no soil formation, demonstrating that there was little long-term stability in plant cover, a finding supporting some of the arguments of Colinvaux. A mixture of continuous but thin vegetation supporting herds of large mammals is one that seems plausible and realistic with the available data.
 
The word "remnants" in the passage is closest in meaning to
remains
evidence
results
reminders
The word "domain" in the passage is closest in meaning to
field of expertise
challenge
interest
responsibility
According to paragraph 3, all of the following are true of the Beringian landscape EXCEPT.
There was little vegetation.
The mammal species there all survived into modern versions.
The climate was drier than it is today.
There were mountains with glaciers.
The purpose of paragraph 3 is to
contrast todays Beringian landscape with other landscapes in the American continent
describe the Beringian landscape during the last ice age
explain why so many Beringian species became extinct during the last ice age
summarize the information about Beringia that historians agree on
The word "continuous" in the passage is closest in meaning to
unpredictable
very cold
dangerous
uninterrupted
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
According to biologist Dale Guthrie, mammal species require broad areas of vegetation to survive.
Dale Guthrie is an Arctic biologist who argued that broad areas of dense vegetation were surely enough to attract mammals such as mammoth, horse, and bison to Beringia.
Dale Guthrie argued that Beringia, though cold and dry, must have had enough dense vegetation to support the herds of mammoth, horse, and bison that lived there.
As long as Beringia was cold and dry, argued Dale Guthrie, dense vegetation grew in order to support the herds of mammoth, horse, and bisonthe mammal species present there.
According to paragraph 4, Guthrie believes that the teeth of ice-age fauna support which of the following conclusions?
Large mammals would not have been able to survive in the Beringian landscape.
Grasslands were part of the Beringian landscape.
Strong winds exposed dry grasses under the snow.
Horses and bison did not have the ability to search for food through deep snow cover.
According to paragraph 4, which of the following statements is true of the relationship between ice-age Benngian animals and their environment?
When present in sufficient quantities, lichens and mosses provide enough nutrients to satisfy the needs of herds of large mammals.
The anatomy of certain animals present in that environment provides information about the intensity of winds there at that time.
The structure of the teeth of most ice-age fauna indicates that they preyed on animals such as the mammoth, horse, and bison.
Horses and bison are large enough that their feet can easily penetrate deep snow and uncover areas where they can feed on plant material.
In paragraph 5, the amount of pollen in Beringian lake sediments from the last ice age is used to explain
how long the ice age lasted
how important pollen is as a source of food
how many different kinds of plants produce pollen
how little vegetation must have been present at that time
According to paragraph 5, how did Dale Guthrie use the information about radiocarbon analysis of bones fromBeringian deposits?
To suggest that Colinvaux should have used different methods to measure the amount of pollen in ice-age lake sediments
To argue that the large Beringian mammals must have eaten plants that produce little, if any, pollen
To show that the conclusions that Colinvaux drew from the analysis of pollen in ice-age lake sediments cannot be correct
To explain why so-called polar deserts are incapable of supporting such large animals as mammoth, horse, and bison
The word "plausible" in the passage is closest in meaning to
preferable
practical
reasonable
advantageous
Which of the following best describes the organization of paragraph 6?
Two contrasting views are presented, and a study that could decide between them is proposed
An argument is offered, and reasons both for and against the argument are presented
A claim is made, and a study supporting the claim is described
New information is presented, and the information is used to show that two competing explanations can each be seen as correct in some way.

In the open sea, animals can often find food reliably available in particular regions or seasons (e g., in coastal areas in springtime). In these circumstances, animals are neither constrained to get the last calorie out of their diet nor is energy conservation a high priority. In contrast, the food levels in the deeper layers of the ocean are greatly reduced, and the energy constraints on the animals are much more severe. To survive at those levels, animals must maximize their energy input, finding and eating whatever potential food source may be present.
In the near-surface layers, there are many large, fast carnivores as well as an immense variety of planktonic animals, which feed on plankton (small, free-floating plants or animals) by filtering them from currents of water that pass through a specialized anatomical structure. These filter-feeders thrive in the well-illuminated surface waters because oceans have so many very small organisms, from bacteria to large algae to larval crustaceans. Even fishes can become successful filter-feeders in some circumstances. Although the vast majority of marine fishes are carnivores, in near-surface regions of high productivity the concentrations of larger phytoplankton (the plant component of plankton) are sufficient to support huge populations of filter-feeding sardines and anchovies. These small fishes use their gill filaments to strain out the algae that dominate such areas. Sardines and anchovies provide the basis for huge commercial fisheries as well as a food resource for large numbers of local carnivores, particularly seabirds. At a much larger scale, baleen whales and whale sharks are also efficient filter-feeders in productive coastal or polar waters, although their filtered particles comprise small animals such as copepods and krill rather than phytoplankton.
Filtering seawater for its particulate nutritional content can be an energetically demanding method of feeding, particularly when the current of water to be filtered has to be generated by the organism itself, as is the case for all planktonic animals. Particulate organic matter of at least 2.5 micrograms per cubic liter is required to provide a filter-feeding planktonic organism with a net energy gain. This value is easily exceeded in most coastal waters, but in the deep sea, the levels of organic matter range from next to nothing to around 7 micrograms per cubic liter. Even though mean levels may mask much higher local concentrations, it is still the case that many deep-sea animals are exposed to conditions in which a normal filter-feeder would starve.
There are, therefore, fewer successful filter-feeders in deep water, and some of those that are there have larger filtering systems to cope with the scarcity of particles. Another solution for such animals is to forage in particular layers of water where the particles may be more concentrated. Many of the groups of animals that typify the filter-feeding lifestyle in shallow water have deep-sea representatives that have become predatory. Their filtering systems, which reach such a high degree of development in shallow- water species, are greatly reduced. Alternative methods of active or passive prey capture have been evolved, including trapping and seizing prey, entangling prey, and sticky tentacles.
 In the deeper waters of the oceans, there is a much greater tendency for animals to await the arrival of food particles or prey rather than to search them out actively (thus minimizing energy expenditure).  This has resulted in a more stealthy style of feeding, with the consequent emphasis on lures and/or the evolution of elongated appendages that increase the active volume of water controlled or monitored by the animal.  Another consequence of the limited availability of prey is that many animals have developed ways of coping with much larger food particles, relative to their own body size, than the equivalent shallower species can process.  Among the fishes there is a tendency for the teeth and jaws to become appreciably enlarged. In such creatures, not only are the teeth hugely enlarged and/or the jaws elongated but the size of the mouth opening may be greatly increased by making the jaw articulations so flexible that they can be effectively dislocated. Very large or long teeth provide almost no room for cutting the prey into a convenient size for swallowing, the fish must gulp the prey down whole.
 
The word "severe" in the passage is closest in meaning to
extreme
complex
basic
immediate
What can be inferred from paragraph 1 about why energy conservation is not a high priority for ocean animals in coastal waters during the spring?
Those animals are least active during the spring
Those animals have a plentiful supply of food
Those animals have to expend energy to avoid predators.
Those animals store energy during the colder seasons.
What can be inferred from paragraph 2 about fish?
Most fish feed on plankton.
Fish tend to avoid well-illuminated areas.
Most fish species are not filter-feeders.
Few fish species are successful in the near-surface layers.
According to paragraph 2, how do sardines and anchovies obtain food near the surface of the ocean?
They rely on the large quantities of food resources also available to local carnivores.
They capture the larvae of some crustaceans.
They feed on the organisms left over by commercial fisheries.
They obtain algae by using their gills as filters.
According to paragraph 2, in which of the following ways are baleen whales and whale sharks different from smaller fitter-feeders like sardines and anchovies?
They are not found in coastal waters.
They are caught by commercial fisheries.
They fitter small animals instead of phytoplankton.
They are not carnivores.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
An organism may obtain food particles from seawater when currents generated by the organism cause water to pass through its fitter
The nutritional content of the food particles in seawater is sufficient to meet the energy demands of most planktonic animals.
As planktonic animals require a lot of energy, they have to generate a current strong enough to bring them sufficient particles of food.
Organisms that filter seawater to meet their nutritional needs expend a lot of energy, especially those organisms that have to create their own currents.
The word "scarcity" in the passage is closest in meaning to
speed
variety
lack
size
According to paragraph 4, deep-water filter-feeders have adopted all of the following ways to obtain food EXCEPT
developing larger filtering systems
capturing prey using sticky tentacles
swimming up to the surface at feeding time
searching in ocean layers that contain a substantial amount of particles
Why does the author include the information that animals in the deep ocean place an "emphasis on lures" and have evolved "elongated appendages" ?
To argue against the view that animals in the deep ocean use more energy to find food than do animals in shallow waters
To emphasize the importance of an am mars ability to control a large volume of water
To identify some feeding strategies that animals have developed to minimize their energy expenditure
To give examples of body structures that help those animals move quickly in deep ocean waters
The phrase "coping with" in the passage is closest in meaning to
Absorbing
finding
approaching
managing
The word "flexible" in the passage is closest in meaning to
huge
adaptable
powerful
precise
According to paragraph 5, why do some fish swallow their prey whole?
Their teeth are too large to allow for cutting prey.
They have no jaw muscles to allow chewing.
Swallowing prey whole results in a higher net energy gain.
Chewing can cause their jaws to dislocate.

One of the most significant evolutionary events that occurred on Earth was the transition of water-dwelling fish to terrestrial tetrapods (four-limbed organisms with backbones). Fish probably originated in the oceans, and our first records of them are in marine rocks. However, by the Devonian Period (408 million to 362 million years ago), they had radiated into almost all available aquatic habitats, including freshwater settings. One of the groups whose fossils are especially common in rocks deposited in fresh water is the lobe-finned fish.
The freshwater Devonian lobe-finned fish rhipidistian crossopterygian is of particular interest to biologists studying tetrapod evolution. These fish lived in river channels and lakes on large deltas. The delta rocks in which these fossils are found are commonly red due to oxidized iron minerals, indicating that the deltas formed in a climate that had alternate wet and dry periods. If there were periods of drought, any adaptations allowing the fish to survive the dry conditions would have been advantageous. In these rhipidistiansseveral such adaptations existed. It is known that they had lungs as well as gills for breathing. Cross sections cut through some of the fossils reveal that the mud filling the interior of the carcass differed in consistency and texture depending on its location inside the fish. These differences suggest a saclike cavity below the front end of the gut that can only be interpreted as a lung. Gills were undoubtedly the main source of oxygen for these fish, but the lungs served as an auxiliary breathing device for gulping air when the water became oxygen depleted, such as during extended periods of drought. So, these fish had already evolved one of the prime requisites for living on land: the ability to use air as a source of oxygen.
A second adaptation of these fish was in the structure of the lobe fins. The fins were thick, fleshy, and quite sturdy, with a median axis of bone down the center. They could have been used as feeble locomotor devices on land, perhaps good enough to allow a fish to flop its way from one pool of water that was almost dry to an adjacent pond that had enough water and oxygen for survival. These fins eventually changed into short, stubby legs. The bones of the fins of a Devonian rhipidistian exactly match in number and position the limb bones of the earliest known tetrapods, the amphibians. It should be emphasized that the evolution of lungs and limbs was in no sense an anticipation of future life on land. These adaptations developed because they helped fish to survive in their existing aquatic environment.
What ecological pressures might have caused fishes to gradually abandon their watery habitat and become increasingly land-dwelling creatures? Changes in climate during the Devonian may have had something to do with this if freshwater areas became progressively more restricted. Another impetus may have been new sources of food. The edges of ponds and streams surely had scattered dead fish and other water-dwelling.   In addition, plants had emerged into terrestrial habitats in areas near streams and ponds, and crabs and other arthropods were also members of this earliest terrestrial community.   Thus, by the Devonian the land habitat marginal to freshwater was probably a rich source of protein that could be exploited by an animal that could easily climb out of water.   Evidence from teeth suggests that these earliest tetrapods did not utilize land plants as food; they were presumably carnivorous and had not developed the ability to feed on plants.  
How did the first tetrapods make the transition to a terrestrial habitat? Like early land plants such as rhyniophytes, they made only a partial transition; they were still quite tied to water. However, many problems that faced early land plants were not applicable to the first tetrapods.The ancestors of these animals already had a circulation system, and they were mobile, so that they could move to water to drink. Furthermore, they already had lungs, which rhipidistians presumably used for auxiliary breathing. The principal changes for the earliest tetrapods were in the skeletal systemchanges in the bones of the fins, the vertebral column, pelvic girdle, and pectoral girdle.
 
Paragraph 1 supports which of the following statements about fish evolution?
Lobe-finned fish were among the earliest types of fish to appear.
Fish began living in freshwater habitats only after originating elsewhere.
Lobe-finned fish radiated into almost all available aquatic habitats.
During the Devonian, lobe-finned fish were more common in marine than in freshwater habitats.
According to paragraph 2, what do the minerals in the delta rocks containing rhipidistian crossopterygian fossils reveal?
These deltas formed in dry periods but gradually became wetter.
These deltas contain different types of iron minerals than do the surrounding areas.
Most rhipidistian crossopterygian fish died when the climate became dry.
Rhipidistian crossopterygian fish lived in areas that experienced alternate dry and wet periods.
The word "advantageous" in the passage is closest in meaning to
beneficial
necessary
remarkable
common
In paragraph 2, why does the author include the information that mud inside rhipidistian crossopterygian fossils differed in consistency and texture depending on where the mud was located?
To provide evidence that rhipidistian crossopterygian lived in river channels and lakes on large deltas.
To identify an effect of the oxidation of iron minerals on the evolution of rhipidistian crossopterygian.
To help explain why scientists have concluded that rhipidistian crossopterygian probably had lungs.
To explain why scientists decided to cut cross sections through some fossils of rhipidistian crossopterygian.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Because the lungs of these fish were able to provide only a small amount of oxygen, these fish obtained most of their oxygen through their gills during periods of drought.
During periods of extended drought, these fish used their lungs to increase their intake of oxygen beyond the levels absorbed by the gills in normal times.
Although these fish primarily used their gills to obtain oxygen, they used their lungs to obtain oxygen from the air when there was not enough in the water.
During periods of extended drought, the gills became an auxiliary breathing device and the lungs became the main source of oxygen for these fish.
According to paragraph 3, the structure of the fins of rhipidistian crossopterygian may have allowed these fish to
reduce the amount of oxygen needed for survival
develop thick, sturdy bones
move more efficiently in water
move short distances over areas that were mostly dry
The word "adjacent" in the passage is closest in meaning to:
nearby
available
temporary
fresh
The word progressively in the passage is closest in meaning to
increasingly
noticeably
occasionally
rapidly
In paragraph 4, why does the author point out that crabs and other arthropods were already living on land when the ancestors of the first tetrapods began living there?
To account for the presence of dead fish along the edges of ponds and streams during the Devonian.
To support the claim that climate change caused freshwater habitats to become more restricted during the Devonian.
To identify a consequence of the emergence of plants into terrestrial habitats near ponds and streams.
To identify a possible reason for why certain fish gradually became terrestrial organisms.
According to paragraph 4, teeth of the earliest tetrapods suggest that these tetrapods
competed with other animals for protein
were probably carnivores
could easily climb out of water
were able to eat plants
According to paragraph 5, which of the following was true of the first tetrapods?
They became dependent for food on organisms already living on land.
They needed to develop new mechanisms for obtaining nutrients.
They continued to live in close association with aquatic environments.
They were evolutionarily far removed from their rhipidistian ancestors.
According to paragraph 5, what was the main way that the earliest tetrapods differed from their immediate fish ancestors?
The tetrapods had a different skeletal structure.
The tetrapods had more sources of food available.
The tetrapods had a circulation system.
The tetrapods could move to new pools of water.

The precursor of the modern camera, the camera obscura is a darkened enclosure into which light is admitted through a lens in a small hole. The image of the illuminated area outside the enclosure is thrown upside down as if by magic onto a surface in the darkened enclosure. This technique was known as long ago as the fifth century B.C. in China. Aristotle also experimented with it in the fourth century B.C., and Leonardo da Vinci described it in his notebooks in 1490. In 1558 Giovanni Battista Della Porta wrote in his twenty-volume work Magia naturalis (meaning "natural magic") instructions for adding a convex lens to improve the quality of the image thrown against a canvas or panel in the darkened area where its outlines could be traced.   Later, portable camera obscuras were developed, with interior mirrors and drawing tables on which the artist could trace the image.   For the artist, this technique allows forms and linear perspective to be drawn precisely as they would be seen from a single viewpoint.   Mirrors were also used to reverse the projected images to their original positions.  
Did some of the great masters of painting, then, trace their images using a camera obscura? Some art historians are now looking for clues of artists' use of such devices. One of the artists whose paintings are being analyzed from this point of view is the great Dutch master, Jan Vermeer, who lived from 1632 to 1675 during the flowering of art and science in the Netherlands, including the science of optics. Vermeer produced only about 30 known paintings, including his famous The Art of Painting. The room shown in it closely resembles the room in other Vermeer paintings, with lighting coming from a window on the left, the same roof beams, and similar floor tiles, suggesting that the room was fitted with a camera obscura on the side in the foreground. The map hung on the opposite wall was a real map in Vermeer's possession, reproduced in such faithful detail that some kind of tracery is suspected. When one of Vermeers paintings was X-rayed, it did not have any preliminary sketches on the canvas beneath the paint, but rather the complete image drawn in black and white without any trial sketches. Vermeer did not have any students, did not keep any records, and did not encourage anyone to visit his studio, facts that can be interpreted as protecting his secret use of a camera obscura.
In recent times the British artist David Hockney has published his investigations into the secret use of the camera obscura, claiming that for up to 400 years, many of Western arts great masters probably used the device to produce almost photographically realistic details in their paintings. He includes in this group Caravaggio, Hans Holbein, Leonardo da Vinci, Diego Velazquez, Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres, Agnolo Bronzino, and Jan van Eyck. From an artists point of view, Hockney observed that a camera obscura compresses the complicated forms of a three-dimensional scene into two-dimensional shapes that can easily be traced and also increases the contrast between light and dark, leading to the chiaroscuro effect seen in many of these paintings. In Jan van Eycks The Marriage of Giovanni Arnolfini and Giovanna Cenami, the complicated foreshortening in the chandelier and the intricate detail in the brides garments are among the clues that Hockney thinks point to the use of the camera obscura.
So what are we to conclude? If these artists did use a camera obscura, does that diminish their stature? Hockney argues that the camera obscura does not replace artistic skill in drawing and painting. In experimenting with it, he found that it is actually quite difficult to use for drawing, and he speculates that the artists probably combined their observations from life with tracing of shapes.
 
What can be inferred from paragraph 1 about Giovanni Battista Della Porta's contribution to the camera obscura?
He translated a Chinese description of the use of the camera obscura and made the technique available to artists.
His convex lens made the projected image easier to trace.
His version of the camera obscura allowed for the later addition of a mirror.
His improvements relied heavily on design changes proposed earlier by Leonardo da Vinci.
The word portable in the passage is closest in meaning to
valuable
practical
moveable
popular
The word "projected" in the passage is closest in meaning to
whole
corrected
enlarged
shown
Paragraph 2 answers which of the following questions about paintings by Vermeer?
What characteristics of Vermeers paintings suggest that he may have used a camera obscura?
Why did Vermeer produce only about 30 paintings?
Do Vermeer's paintings in general suggest that he was unable to paint accurately without using a camera obscura?
Why did Vermeer need to draw an image on the canvas of the painting that was X-rayed if he was using a camera obscura?
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
One artist with a particularly interesting point of view about the use of the camera obscura in painting was Jan Vermeer, who lived in the Netherlands from 1632 to 1675.
Historical analyses suggest that Dutch masters were interested in the science of optics, so they may have used the camera obscura to trace images.
The use of the camera obscura is being analyzed in the paintings of Jan Vermeer, who lived in the Netherlands when art and science were flourishing there.
One view held by historians is that most Dutch masters were as interested in art as they were in science, and that provides clues about the techniques used in their paintings.
What does paragraph 2 indicate about Vermeers The Art of Painting?
It is the first in a series of about 30 paintings that he created.
It may have been painted by one of his students.
it was in his possession until his death in 1675.
It has the same setting as several other works of his.
The word "faithful" in the passage is closest in meaning to
unusual
extensive
exact
historical
Why does the author provide the information that "When one of Vermeer's paintings was X-rayed, it did not have any preliminary sketches on the canvas beneath the paint, but rather the complete image drawn in black and white without any trial sketches"?
To provide an example of a way to learn about the practices of artists who did not keep good records
To emphasize Vermeers confidence and skill as an artist
To provide evidence that Vermeer may have traced the image using a camera obscura
To argue that Vermeer did his preliminary sketching on paper, rather than on canvas
According to paragraph 3, Hockney believes that all of the following indicate use of a camera obscura EXCEPT
very detailed, realistic work
increased contrast between light and dark
oversimplification of forms when the image is traced
complicated foreshortening of objects
The word "intricate in the passage is closest in meaning to
surprising
complex
beautiful
clear
The word diminish" in the passage is closest in meaning to
reduce
affect
reflect
determine
According to paragraph 4, what does Hockney argue about the use of the camera obscura in producing art?
Works produced using a camera obscura do not deserve as much respect as those produced without it.
The camera obscura was probably used primarily as a training device, rather than used in producing finished works.
Use of the camera obscura by Western arts great masters was probably relatively rare.
While the use of the camera obscura may have helped artists, they still needed to have significant artistic ability.

Many areas of the shallow sea bottom are covered with a lush growth of aquatic flowering plants adapted to live submerged in seawater.   These plants are collectively called seagrasses.   Seagrass beds are strongly influenced by several physical factors.   The most significant is water motion: currents and waves.   Since seagrass systems exist in both sheltered and relatively open areas, they are subject to differing amounts of water motion. For any given seagrass system, however, the water motion is relatively constant. Seagrass meadows in relatively turbulent waters tend to form a mosaic of individual mounds, whereas meadows in relatively calm waters tend to form flat, extensive carpets. The seagrass beds, in turn, dampen wave action, particularly if the blades reach the water surface. This damping effect can be significant to the point where just one meter into a seagrass bed the wave motion can be reduced to zero. Currents are also slowed as they move into the bed.
The slowing of wave action and currents means that seagrass beds tend to accumulate sediment. However, this is not universal and depends on the currents under which the bed exists. Seagrass beds under the influence of strong currents tend to have many of the lighter particles, including seagrass debris, moved out, whereas beds in weak current areas accumulate lighter detrital material. It is interesting that temperate seagrass beds accumulate sediments from sources outside the beds, whereas tropical seagrass beds derive most of their sediments from within.
Since most seagrass systems are depositional environments, they eventually accumulate organic material that leads to the creation of fine-grained sediments with a much higher organic content than that of the surrounding unvegetated areas. This accumulation, in turn, reduces the water movement and the oxygen supply. The high rate of metabolism (the processing of energy for survival) of the microorganisms in the sediments causes sediments to be anaerobic (without oxygen) below the first few millimeters. According to ecologist J. W. Kenworthy, anaerobic processes of the microorganisms in the sediment are an important mechanism for regenerating and recycling nutrients and carbon, ensuring the high rates of productivitythat is, the amount of organic material produced-that are measured in those beds. In contrast to other productivity in the ocean, which is confined to various species of algae and bacteria dependent on nutrient concentrations in the water column, seagrasses are rooted plants that absorb nutrients from the sediment or substrate. They are, therefore, capable of recycling nutrients into the ecosystem that would otherwise be trapped in the bottom and rendered unavailable.
Other physical factors that have an effect on seagrass beds include light, temperature, and desiccation (drying out). For example, water depth and turbidity (density of particles in the water) together or separately control the amount of light available to the plants and the depth to which the seagrasses may extend. Although marine botanist W. A. Setchell suggested early on that temperature was critical to the growth and reproduction of eelgrass, it has since been shown that this particularly widespread seagrass grows and reproduces at temperatures between 2 and 4 degrees Celsius in the Arctic and at temperatures up to 28 degrees Celsius on the northeastern coast of the United States. Still, extreme temperatures, in combination with other factors, may have dramatic detrimental effects. For example, in areas of the cold North Atlantic, ice may form in winter. Researchers Robertson and Mann note that when the ice begins to break up, the wind and tides may move the ice around, scouring the bottom and uprooting the eelgrass. In contrast, at the southern end of the eelgrass range, on the southeastern coast of the United States, temperatures over 30 degrees Celsius in summer cause excessive mortality. Seagrass beds also decline if they are subjected to too much exposure to the air. The effect of desiccation is often difficult to separate from the effect of temperature. Most seagrass beds seem tolerant of considerable changes in salinity (salt levels) and can be found in brackish (somewhat salty) waters as well as in full- strength seawater.
 
According to paragraph 1, which of the following is true about seagrasses in calm ocean waters?
They will not survive for very long without the nutrients brought In by fast-moving waters.
They tend to form beds covering large areas along the ocean floor.
They usually are arranged in separate mounds.
They grow more slowly than do seagrasses in fast-moving waters.
According to paragraph 1, which of the following is MOST likely to describe a bed in which seagrasses reach the surface of the water?
The water is almost completely still.
The bed often has major damage from strong waves or currents.
The bed is generally no more than one square meter in size.
Grasses form a mosaic of individual mounds.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Light particles and debris collect in some seagrass beds, but are washed out of those affected by strong currents.
Seagrass beds under the influence of strong currents tend to accumulate many of the lighter particles from other beds.
The strength of the currents determines how quickly accumulated seagrass debris is moved out of the beds.
Seagrass debris and other light particles are often moved from areas of strong currents to areas of weak currents.
The word "derive" in the passage is closest in meaning to
maintain
expel
obtain
enrich
According to paragraph 3, which of the following does NOT accurately describe the sediments that collect in seagrass beds?
Fine-grained
Only a few millimeters deep
Low in oxygen
Rich in organic matter
The word "confined" in the passage is closest in meaning to
related
limited
relevant
helpful
According to paragraph 3, how do seagrasses affect the nutrient supply in the ecosystem?
Because of their high rate of metabolism, they consume a large percentage of the available nutrients.
They attract various species of algae and bacteria that produce high nutrient concentrations in the water column.
They take up carbon and other nutrients trapped on the sea bottom and bring them back into use.
Through anaerobic processes at their roots, they produce a very nutrient-rich sediment.
It can be inferred from paragraph 4 that the reason seagrasses do not grow in very deep water is that
they cannot handle intense water pressure
deep water is too cold
they would not get enough light
deep water is too salty
In paragraph 4, why does the author mention that eelgrass thrives in both the Arctic and in the northeastern United States?
To show that environments with extreme temperatures rarely have any effect on eelgrass
To identify the northern and southern limits of the range where eelgrass is found
To support the author's statement that eelgrass is a particularly widespread kind of seagrass
To cite evidence tending to disprove one view about the importance of temperature to the growth of eelgrass
The word "detrimental" in the passage is closest in meaning to
harmful
significant
unexpected
distinct
Paragraph 4 suggests that which of the following would be the LEAST likely to cause major damage to eelgrass and other common seagrasses?
Factors related to extreme temperatures
Exposure to air
Major changes in salinity
The movement of ice on the seafloor
The phrase "tolerant of" in the passage is closest in meaning to
unused to
strongly affected by
protected from
able to withstand

In 334 B.C. Alexander the Great took his Greek armies to the east and in only a few years completed his creation of an empire out of much of southwest Asia. In the new empire, barriers to trade and the movement of peoples were removed; markets were put in touch with one another. In the next generation thousands of Greek traders and artisans would enter this wider world to seek their fortunes. Alexanders actions had several important consequences for the region occupied by the empire.
The first of these was the expansion of Greek civilization throughout the Middle East. Greek became the great international language. Towns and cities were established not only as garrisons (military posts) but as centers for the diffusion of Greek language, literature, and thought, particularly through libraries, as at Antioch (in modern Turkey) and the most famous of all, at Alexandria in Egypt, which would be the finest in the world for the next thousand years.
Second, this internationalism spelled the end of the classical Greek city-state - the unit of government in ancient Greece - and everything it stood for. Most city-states had been quite small in terms of citizenry, and this was considered to be a good thing. The focus of life was the agora, the open marketplace where assemblies could be held and where issues of the day, as well as more fundamental topics such as the purpose of government or the relationship between law and freedom, could be discussed and decisions made by individuals in person. The philosopher Plato (428-348 B.C.) felt that the ideal city-state should have about 5,000 citizens, because to the Greeks it was important that everyone in the community should know each other. In decision making, the whole body of citizens together would have the necessary knowledge in order generally to reach the right decision, even though the individual might not be particularly qualified to decide. The philosopher Aristotle (384-322 B.C.), who lived at a time when the city-state system was declining, believed that a political entity of 100,000 simply would not be able to govern itself.
This implied that the city-state was based on the idea that citizens were not specialists but had multiple interests and talents - each a so-called jack-of-all-trades who could engage in many areas of life and politics. It implied a respect for the wholeness of life and a consequent dislike of specialization.   It implied economic and military self-sufficiency.   But with the development of trade and commerce in Alexander's empire came the growth of cities; it was no longer possible to be a jack-of-all-trades.   One now had to specialize, and with specialization came professionalism.   There were getting to be too many persons to know, an easily observable community of interests was being replaced by a multiplicity of interests. The city-state was simply too "small-time".
Third, Greek philosophy was opened up to the philosophy and religion of the East. At the peak of the Greek city-state, religion played an important part. Its gods - such as Zeus, father of the gods, and his wife Hera - were thought of very much as being like human beings but with superhuman abilities. Their worship was linked to the rituals connected with ones progress through life - birth, marriage, and death - and with invoking protection against danger, making prophecies, and promoting healing, rather than to any code of behavior. Nor was there much of a theory of afterlife.
Even before Alexanders time, a life spent in the service of their city-state no longer seemed ideal to Greeks. The Athenian philosopher Socrates (470-399 B.C.) was the first person in Greece to propose a morality based on individual conscience rather than the demands of the state, and for this he was accused of not believing in the citys gods and so corrupting the youth, and he was condemned to death. Greek philosophy - or even a focus on conscience - might complement religion but was no substitute for it, and this made Greeks receptive to the religious systems of the Middle East, even if they never adopted them completely. The combination of the religious instinct of Asia with the philosophic spirit of Greece spread across the world in the era after Alexanders death, blending the culture of the Middle East with the culture of Greece.
 
According to paragraph 1, Alexander the Great did which of the following?
Regulated the movement and resettlement in southwest Asia of thousands of Greek people
Opened up opportunities in new markets for traders and artisans
Created new restrictions on trade
Encouraged Greek citizens to choose military careers over careers in trade
The word "diffusion" in the passage is closest in meaning to
adoption
spread
teaching
learning
In paragraph 2, the author mentions the libraries at Antioch and Alexandria in order to
provide evidence that the library was a cultural institution in the East before it spread to the West
explain why it was important for Greek to become the great international language
identify two of the sources of Greek cultural influence within Alexanders empire
support the claim that the Greeks transformed Middle Eastern garrisons and military posts into cultural centers
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Assemblies were held in the agora to discuss some issues of the day, but more fundamental questions were decided by key individuals.
In a culture where philosophical discussions were frequent, some individuals questioned the value of a life focused on the marketplace.
Life centered around the agora, an open marketplace and site for public debate, where individuals could participate in decision making.
The focus of individuals was on fundamental topics such as the purpose of government and the connection between law and freedom.
According to paragraph 3, Plato believed that the ideal city-state should be
governed by a ruling body of about 5,000 city leaders with a total population of no more than 100,000
led by the most qualified individual
governed by the group of citizens with the most knowledge about the issues of the day
small enough so that everyone would know each other
Why does the author mention "The philosopher Aristotle"?
To provide additional evidence that the ancient Greeks believed that political units must be small
To demonstrate the accuracy of philosophers predictions about the end of the classical Greek city-state
To show how changes in the city-state system from the fifth to the third century B C. were reflected in the ideas of its philosophers
To support the claim that small city-states were ideally suited to produce philosophical inquiry
The word "declining" in the passage is closest in meaning to
at its best
rapidly expanding
first being formed
weakening
According to paragraph 4, Alexander's empire was characterized by all of the following EXCEPT
decreased need for military control
growing professionalism
growth of cities
specialization in trades
The word peak in the passage is closest in meaning to
end
command
high point
beginning
According to paragraph 5, religion in the Greek city-state involved
a set of rules governing behavior
a detailed conception of life after death
rituals related to significant life events
worship of gods who were not like humans
According to paragraph 6, what was the basis for the accusation against Socrates?
He encouraged people to be guided by their own consciences instead of by the state
He stated that people had a duty to fight against the corruption of their leaders
He reasoned that the needs of the youth were more important than the needs of the state
He argued that peoples behavior should be guided by the religious systems of the Middle East
The word "propose" in the passage is closest in meaning to
suggest
deny
consider
question

Petroleum is defined as a gaseous, liquid, and semisolid naturally occurring substance that consists chiefly of hydrocarbons (chemical compounds of carbon and hydrogen). Petroleum is therefore a term that includes both oil and natural gas. Petroleum is nearly always found in marine sedimentary rocks. In the ocean, microscopic phytoplankton (tiny floating plants) and bacteria (simple, single-celled organisms) are the principal sources of organic matter that is trapped and buried in sediment. Most of the organic matter is buried in clay that is slowly converted to a fine-grained sedimentary rock known as shale. During this conversion, organic compounds are transformed to oil and natural gas.
  Sampling on the continental shelves and along the base of the continental slopes has shown that fine muds beneath the seafloor contain up to 8 percent organic matter.   Two additional kinds of evidence support the hypothesis that petroleum is a product of the decomposition of organic matter: oil possesses optical properties known only in hydrocarbons derived from organic matter, and oil contains nitrogen and certain compounds believed to originate only in living matter.   A complex sequence of chemical reactions is involved in converting the original solid organic matter to oil and gas, and additional chemical changes may occur in the oil and gas even after they have formed.  
It is now well established that petroleum migrates through aquifers and can become trapped in reservoirs. Petroleum migration is analogous to groundwater migration. When oil and gas are squeezed out of the shale in which they originated and enter a body of sandstone or limestone somewhere above, they migrate readily because sandstones (consisting of quartz grains) and limestones (consisting of carbonate minerals) are much more permeable than any shale. The force of molecular attraction between oil and quartz or carbonate minerals is weaker than that between water and quartz or carbonate minerals. Hence, because oil and water do not mix, water remains fastened to the quartz or carbonate grains, while oil occupies the central parts of the larger openings in the porous sandstone or limestone. Because oil is lighter than water, it tends to glide upward past the carbonate- and quartz-held water. In this way, oil becomes segregated from the water; when it encounters a trap, it can form a pool.
Most of the petroleum that forms in sediments does not find a suitable trap and eventually makes its way, along with groundwater, to the surface of the sea. It is estimated that no more than 0.1 percent of all the organic matter originally buried in a sediment is eventually trapped in an oil pool. It is not surprising, therefore, that the highest ratio of oil and gas pools to volume of sediment is found in rock no older than 2.5 million years - young enough so that little of the petroleum has leaked away - and that nearly 60 percent of all oil and gas discovered so far has been found in strata that formed in the last 65 million years This does not mean that older rocks produced less petroleum; it simply means that oil in older rocks has had a longer time in which to leak away.
How much oil is there in the world? This is an extremely controversial question. Many billions of barrels of oil have already been pumped out of the ground. A lot of additional oil has been located by drilling but is still waiting to be pumped out. Possibly a great deal more oil remains to be found by drilling. Unlike coal, the volume of which can be accurately estimated, the volume of undiscovered oil can only be guessed at. Guesses involve the use of accumulated experience from a century of drilling. Knowing how much oil has been found in an intensively drilled area, such as eastern Texas, experts make estimates of probable volumes in other regions where rock types and structures are similar to those in eastern Texas. Using this approach and considering all the sedimentary basins of the world, experts estimate that somewhere between 1,500 and 3,000 billion barrels of oil will eventually be discovered.
 
According to paragraph 1, petroleum is formed in which of the following ways?
Bacteria and tiny plants undergo a change while they are buried in clay
Carbon and hydrogen combine to form shale
Ocean rocks are converted into organic compounds
Oil and gas rise to the surface of sediment and are trapped in rocks
The word "trapped" in the passage is closest in meaning to
hidden
destroyed
caught
found
All of the following are cited in paragraph 2 as evidence that petroleum is a product of the decomposition of organic matter EXCEPT
the amount of organic matter found in layers of mud below the seafloor
the chemical changes that occur in oil and natural gas after they have formed
the optical properties of oil
the fact that oil contains nitrogen and other compounds believed to be of organic origin
According to paragraph 2, which of the following is true of the change of solid organic material into oil and gas?
It is more likely to occur along the base of continental slopes than on the continental shelves
It only takes place in areas where the seafloor contains at least 8 percent organic matter
It is a process that can be reversed through chemical changes that occur after the oil and gas have formed
It involves a complicated series of chemical reactions
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
When oil and gas are squeezed out of the rock in which they originated, it is probably because the layer of rock above them is much more permeable than shale
Sandstones, which are made of quartz grains, and limestones, which are made of carbonate minerals, can hold much more oil and gas than any shale can
When they are squeezed from the shale in which they were formed, oil and gas move easily into the much more permeable layers of sandstone or limestone above
Oil and gas are squeezed out of sandstones, consisting of quartz grains, and migrate readily into limestones, which consist of carbonate minerals and are much more permeable
Why does the author include the information that "The force of molecular attraction between oil and quartz or carbonate minerals is weaker than that between water and quartz or carbonate minerals"?
To help explain why petroleum behaves differently from water in bodies of sandstone and limestone
To illustrate why petroleum migrates more rapidly through sandstone than it does through limestone
To help explain how water and petroleum can mix in certain aquifers
To account for the different molecular structures of oil and water
The word "encounters" in the passage is closest in meaning to
meets
forms
escapes
avoids
The word "suitable" in the passage is closest in meaning to
noticeable
permanent
protected
appropriate
According to paragraph 4, what happens to most of the petroleum that forms in sediments?
It remains in underground pools
It is buried under organic matter
It rises to the surface of the ocean
It combines with the minerals found in groundwater
Paragraph 4 supports which of the following statements about future petroleum discoveries?
Less petroleum will be found than in the past because the ratio of petroleum pools to volume of sediment will decrease
Most of the petroleum will come from rocks that are less than 65 million years old
Petroleum that has leaked away from older rocks will be the source of most new discoveries
More petroleum will become available because the amount of trapped organic matter will increase
The phrase "is an extremely controversial question" in the passage is closest in meaning to
is a question of great importance
is a question causing strong disagreement
is a question that has existed for a long time
is a question composed of many related parts
According to paragraph 5, eastern Texas is an example of a geologic region where
oil is located but has not yet been pumped out
experts accurately predicted the rock types and structures found there
the volume of oil can only be guessed at
intensive oil exploration has occurred over a long time

By 1850 the United States possessed roughly 9,000 miles of railroad track; ten years later it had over 30,000 miles, more than the rest of the world combined. Much of the new construction during the 1850s occurred west of the Appalachian Mountains  over 2,000 miles in the states of Ohio and Illinois alone.
The effect of the new railroad lines rippled outward through the economy. Farmers along the tracks began to specialize in crops that they could market in distant locations. With their profits they purchased manufactured goods that earlier they might have made at home. Before the railroad reached Tennessee, the state produced about 25,000 bushels (or 640 tons) of wheat, which sold for less than 50 cents a bushel. Once the railroad came, farmers in the same counties grew 400,000 bushels (over 10,000 tons) and sold their crop at a dollar a bushel.

The new railroad networks shifted the direction of western trade.  In 1840 most northwestern grain was shipped south down the Mississippi River to the bustling port of New Orleans.
  But low water made steamboat travel hazardous in summer, and ice shut down traffic in winter. Products such as lard, tallow, and cheese quickly spoiled if stored in New Orleans hot and 
 humid warehouses.  Increasingly, traffic from the Midwest flowed west to east, over the new rail lines. Chicago became the regions hub, linking the farms of the upper Midwest to New York and 
 other eastern cities by more than 2,000 miles of track in 1855. Thus while the value of goods shipped by river to New Orleans continued to increase, the Souths overall share of western trade 
 dropped dramatically.

A sharp rise in demand for grain abroad also encouraged farmers in the Northeast and Midwest to become more commercially oriented. Wheat, which in 1845 commanded $1.08 a bushel in New York City, fetched $2.46 in 1855; in similar fashion the price of corn nearly doubled. Farmers responded by specializing in cash crops, borrowing to purchase more land, and investing in equipment to increase productivity.
As railroad lines fanned out from Chicago, farmers began to acquire open prairie land in Illinois and then Iowa, putting the fertile, deep black soil into production. Commercial agriculture transformed this remarkable treeless environment. To settlers accustomed to eastern woodlands, the thousands of square miles of tall grass were an awesome sight. Indian grass, Canada wild rye, and native big bluestem all grew higher than a person. Because eastern plows could not penetrate the densely tangled roots of prairie grass, the earliest settlers erected farms along the boundary separating the forest from the prairie. In 1837, however, John Deere patented a sharp-cutting steel plow that sliced through the sod without soil sticking to the blade. Cyrus McCormick refined a mechanical reaper that harvested fourteen times more wheat with the same amount of labor. By the 1850s McCormick was selling 1,000 reapers a year and could not keep up with demand, while Deere turned out 10,000 plows annually.
The new commercial farming fundamentally altered the Midwestern landscape and the environment. Native Americans had grown corn in the region for years, but never in such large fields as did later settlers who became farmers, whose surpluses were shipped east. Prairie farmers also introduced new crops that were not part of the earlier ecological system, notably wheat, along with fruits and vegetables. Native grasses were replaced by a small number of plants cultivated as commodities. Corn had the best yields, but it was primarily used to feed livestock. Because bread played a key role in the American and European diet, wheat became the major cash crop. Tame grasses replaced native grasses in pastures for making hay.
Western farmers altered the landscape by reducing the annual fires that had kept the prairie free from trees. In the absence of these fires, trees reappeared on land not in cultivation and, if undisturbed, eventually formed woodlots. The earlier unbroken landscape gave way to independent farms, each fenced off in a precise checkerboard pattern. It was an artificial ecosystem of animals, woodlots, and crops, whose large, uniform layout made western farms more efficient than the more-irregular farms in the East.
 
According to paragraph 1, each of the following is true about railroad track in the United States EXCEPT:
In 1850 the United State had less than 10,000 miles of railroad track.
By the end of the 1850s, Ohio and lllinois contained more railroad track than any other state in the country.
Much of the railroad track built in the United States during the 1850s was located west of the Appalachian Mountain.
By 1860 there were more miles of railroad track in the United States than in any other country.
It can be inferred from paragraph 2 that the new railroads had which of the following effects on farm communities?
Most new farms were located along the tracks.
Farmers began to grow wheat as a commercial crop.
Many farmer decided to grow a wider variety of crops.
Demand for manufactured goods increased among farmers.
The word bustling in the passage is closest in meaning to
famous
important
growing
busy
According to paragraph 3, in what way did the new rail networks change western trade?
Northwestern farmers almost completely stopped shipping goods by steamboat.
Many western goods began to be shipped east by way of Chicago rather than south to New Orleans.
Chicago largely replaced New York and other eastern cities as the final market for goods for the West.
The value of goods shipped west soon became greater than the value of goods shipped east.
According to paragraph 3, what was a disadvantage of shipping goods from northwestern areas to New Orleans?
There was no reliable way to get goods from New Orleans to eastern cities.
The cost of shipping goods by river to New Orleans continued to increase.
Goods shipped from New Orleans neighboring areas had a significant competitive advantage because of their lower transportation costs.
Goods stored in New Orleans' warehouses often spoiled because of the high temperatures and humidity.
Paragraph 4 supports the idea that the price of wheat more than doubled between 1845 and 1855 because
the price of corn nearly doubled during that same period
demand for grain increased sharply outside the United States
farmers in the Northeast and Midwest began to specialize in cash crops
many farmers had borrowed heavily to purchase land and equipment for raising wheat
The word transformed in the passage is closest in meaning to
dominated
changed
improved
created
The word erected in the passage is closest in meaning to
looked for
lived on
preferred
built
Why does author point out that Indian grass, Canada wild rye, and native big bluestem all grew higher than a person?
To provide a reason why people from the eastern woodlands of the United States were impressed when they saw the prairie
To identify an obstacles to the development of the railroad lines fanning out from Chicago
To explain why the transformation of the prairies by commercial agriculture was so remarkable
To provide evidence supporting the claim that the prairies had fertile, deep black soil
According to paragraph 5, the first settlers generally did not farm open prairie land because
they could not plow it effectively with the tools that were available
prairie land was usually very expensive to buy
the soil along boundaries between the forest and the prairie was more fertile than the soil of the open prairie
the railroad lines had not yet reached the open prairie when the first settlers arrived
The word surpluses in the passage is closest in meaning to
extra goods
commercial goods
unprocessed goods
transportable goods
According to paragraph 7, prairie farmers changed the landscape by doing all of the following EXCEPT
Reducing annual fires
Dividing the land into large, regularly-shaped lots
Planting trees that eventually formed woodlots
Fencing off their farms

The cold Humboldt Current of the Pacific Ocean flows toward the equator along the coasts of Ecuador and Peru in South America. When the current approaches the equator, the westward-flowing trade winds cause nutrient-rich cold water along the coast to rise from deeper depths to more shallow ones. This upwelling of water has economic repercussions. Fishing, especially for anchovies, is a major local industry.
Every year during the months of December and January, a weak, warm countercurrent replaces the normally cold coastal waters. Without the upwelling of nutrients from below to feed the fish, fishing comes to a standstill. Fishers in this region have known the phenomenon for hundreds of years. In fact, this is the time of year they traditionally set aside to tend to their equipment and await the return of cold water. The residents of the region have given this phenomenon the name of El Nio, which is Spanish for "the child," because it occurs at about the time of the celebration of birth of the Christ child.
While the warm-water countercurrent usually lasts for two months or less, there are occasions when the disruption to the normal flow lasts for many months. In these situations, water temperatures are raised not just along the coast, but for thousands of kilometers offshore. Over the last few decades, the term El Nio has come to be used to describe these exceptionally strong episodes and not the annual event. During the past 60 years, at least ten El Nios have been observed. Not only do El Nios affect the temperature of the equatorial Pacific, but the strongest of them impact global weather.
The processes that interact to produce an El Nio involve conditions all across the Pacific, not just in the waters off South America. Over 60 years ago, Sir Gilbert Walker, a British scientist, discovered a connection between surface pressure readings at weather stations on the eastern and western sides of the Pacific. He noted that a rise in atmospheric pressure in the eastern Pacific is usually accompanied by a fall in pressure in the western Pacific and vice versa. He called this seesaw pattern the Southern Oscillation. It was later realized that there is a close link between El Nio and the Southern Oscillation. In fact, the link between the two is so great that they are often referred to jointly as ENSO (El Nio-Southern Oscillation).
During a typical year, the eastern Pacific has a higher pressure than the western Pacific does. This east-to-west pressure gradient enhances the trade winds over the equatorial waters. This results in a warm surface current that moves east to west at the equator. The western Pacific develops a thick, warm layer of water while the eastern Pacific has the cold Humboldt Current enhanced by upwelling. However, in other years the Southern Oscillation, for unknown reasons, swings in the opposite direction, dramatically changing the usual conditions described above, with pressure increasing in the western Pacific and decreasing in the eastern Pacific. This change in the pressure gradient causes the trade winds to weaken or, in some cases, to reverse. This then causes the warm water in the western Pacific to flow eastward, increasing sea-surface temperatures in the central and eastern Pacific. The eastward shift signals the beginning of an El Nio.
Scientists try to document as many past El Nio events as possible by piecing together bits of historical evidence, such as sea-surface temperature records, daily observations of atmospheric pressure and rainfall, fisheries records from South America, and the writings of Spanish colonists dating back to the fifteenth century. From such historical evidence we know that El Nios have occurred as far back as records go.   It would seem that they are becoming more frequent.   Records indicate that during the sixteenth century, an El Nio occurred on average every six years.   Evidence gathered over the past few decades indicates that El Nios are now occurring on average a little over every two years.   Even more alarming is the fact that they appear to be getting stronger. The 1997-1998 ElNio brought copious and damaging rainfall to the southern United States, from California to Florida. Snowstorms in the northeast portion of the United States were more frequent and intense than in most years.
 
The word "approaches" in the passage is closest in meaning to
nears
crosses
travels along
leaves
According to paragraph 1, what happens when the Humboldt Current interacts with westward flowing trade winds?
Anchovies from southern waters are carried northward.
Cold water from lower depths is brought closer to the surface.
The Humboldt Current stops flowing toward the equator.
The Humboldt Current begins to flow closer to the coasts of Ecuador and Peru.
Which of the following questions about the El Niophenomenon is NOT answered in paragraph 2 ?
Why is the El Nio phenomenon called El Nio?
How do fishers spend their time during the El Nio season?
How do coastal fish obtain enough nutrients during the El Nio season?
Is the temperature of coastal waters different during the El Nio season than it is the rest of the year?
The word "exceptionally" in the passage is closest in meaning to
obviously
unusually
relatively
occasionally
Paragraph 3 supports which of the following statements about El Nios, as that term is now used?
El Nios can originate in areas other than the Pacific Ocean
El Nios can arise when warm currents last for two months or less
El Nios affect water temperatures long distances from the South American coast
Multiple El Nios can arise within a single calendar year
The phrase "is usually accompanied by in the passage is closest in meaning to
usually develops before
usually occurs together with
is usually indicated by
is usually caused by
The word "jointly" in the passage is closest in meaning to
together
therefore
rightfully
simply
According to paragraph 4, what did Sir Gilbert Walker discover?
There is a close link between El Nio and the Southern Oscillation
Surface pressure readings all across the Pacific first rise and then fall before an El Nio occurs
Surface pressure on one side of the Pacific tends to fall when pressure rises on the opposite side
The formation of an El Nio depends on conditions all across the Pacific, not just in the waters off of South America
According to paragraph 5, what is the end result of the east-to-west pressure gradient in the eastern Pacific during a typical year?
The formation of a thick, warm layer of water in the western Pacific
The reversal of the pressure gradient to west-to-east by the end of the year
A change in the direction of the Southern Oscillation
The eastward flow of warm water from the western Pacific
According to paragraph 5, all of the following changes occur in the Pacific before an ElNiobegins EXCEPT
Pressure increases in the western Pacific and decreases in the eastern Pacific
The trade winds decrease in intensity or reverse in the direction
Surface temperatures increase in the central and eastern Pacific
Ocean currents speed up as they move eastward
What can be inferred about El Nios from the historical evidence mentioned in paragraph 6?
They have often brought damaging weather to parts of the United States
They have been occurring since at least the fifteenth century
They occurred less frequently in the sixteenth century than in the fifteenth
They have had stronger weather effects on the United States in recent decades than on other locations
Why does the author include the information that in 1997-1998 "Snowstorms in the northeast portion of the United States were more frequent and intense than in most years"?
To provide evidence supporting the claim that El Nios are getting stronger
To explain why the southern United States experienced copious and damaging rainfall in 1997-1998
To show that traditional methods are not adequate for documenting the effects of El Nios
To identify a consequence of the fact that El Nios are now occurring a little over once every two years

Biologist Ernst Mayr defined a species as an actually or potentially interbreeding population that does not interbreed with other such populations when there is opportunity to do so. A key event in the origin of many species is the separation of a population with its gene pool (all of the genes in a population at any one time) from other populations of the same species, thereby preventing population interbreeding. With its gene pool isolated, a separate population can follow its own evolutionary course. In the formation of many species, the initial isolation of a population seems to have been a geographic barrier. This mode of evolving new species is called allopatric speciation.
Many factors can isolate a population geographically. A mountain range may emerge and gradually split a population of organisms that can inhabit only lowland lakes, certain fish populations might become isolated in this way. Similarly, a creeping glacier may gradually divide a population, or a land bridge such as the Isthmus of Panama may form and separate the marine life in the ocean waters on either side.
How formidable must a geographic barrier be to keep populations apart? It depends on the ability of the organisms to move across barriers. Birds and coyotes can easily cross mountains and rivers. The passage of wind-blown tree pollen is also not hindered by such barriers, and the seeds of many plants may be carried back and forth on animals. In contrast, small rodents may find a deep canyon or a wide river an effective barrier. For example, the Grand Canyon, in the southwestern United States, separate the range of the white-tailed antelope squirrel from that of the closely related Harris antelope squirrel. Smaller, with a shorter tail that is white underneath, the white-tailed antelope squirrel inhabits deserts north of the canyon and west of the Colorado River in southern California. Harris' antelope squirrel has a more limited range in deserts south of the Grand Canyon.
Geographic isolation creates opportunities for new species to develop, but it does not necessarily lead to new species because speciation occurs only when the gene pool undergoes enough changes to establish reproductive barriers between the isolated population and its parent population. The likelihood of allopatric speciation increases when a population is small as well as isolated, making it more likely than a large population to have its gene pool changed substantially. For example, in less than two million years, small populations of stray animals and plants from the South American mainland that managed to colonize the Galapagos Islands gave rise to all the species that now inhabit the islands.
When oceanic islands are far enough apart to permit populations to evolve in isolation, but close enough to allow occasional dispersions to occur, they are effectively outdoor laboratories of evolution. The Galapagos island chain is one of the world's greatest showcases of evolution. Each island was born from underwater volcanoes and was gradually covered by organisms derived from strays that rode the ocean currents and winds from other islands and continents. Organisms can also be carried to islands by other organisms, such as sea birds that travel long distances with seeds clinging to their feathers.
The species on the Galapagos Islands today, most of which occur nowhere else, descended from organisms that floated, flew, or were blown over the sea from the South American mainland. For instance, the Galapagos island chain has a total of thirteen species of closely related birds called Galapagos finches. These birds have many similarities but differ in their feeding habits and their beak type, which is correlated with what they eat. Accumulated evidence indicates that all thirteen finch species evolved from a single small population of ancestral birds that colonized one of the islands. Completely isolated on the island after migrating from the mainland, the founder population may have undergone significant changes in its gene pool and become a new species.  Later, a few individuals of this new species may have been blown by storms to a neighboring island.  Isolated on this second island, the second founder population could have evolved into a second new species, which could later recolonize the island from which its founding population emigrated.  Today each Galapagos island has multiple species of finches, with as many as ten on some islands.  
 
The word key in the passage is closest in meaning to
early
crucial
noticeable
frequent
The word initial in the passage is closest in meaning to    
best
usual
first
actual
According to paragraph 1, allopatric speciation is possible when 
a population contains all the different genes present in a species at a particular time
a population becomes isolated due to the presence of a geographic barrier
genetic mixing begins to occur in previously separate populations of a species
a species is successful in crossing a geographic barrier
How is paragraph 2 related to paragraph 1?
Paragraph 2 points out a number of ways in which the phenomenon of geographic isolation mentioned in paragraph 1 can occur
Paragraph 2 identifies discoveries that led to the conclusion presented in paragraph 1 that geographic isolation has played a role in the origin of many species
Paragraph 2 provides evidence supporting the statement in paragraph 1 that a population can follow its own evolutionary course once its gene pool becomes isolated
Paragraph 2 explains why the term allopatric was adopted to describe the method of speciation described in paragraph 1
In paragraph 3, the author contrasts a variety of organisms to illustrate which of the following points?
Geographic barriers are less likely to keep apart populations of plants than populations of animals.
Geographic barriers are more likely to keep apart populations of large organisms than populations of small organisms
Some members of a species are able to cross geographic barriers, while other members of the same species are not.
The effectiveness of geographic barriers in keeping organisms apart depends on an organisms ability to move across barriers.
Paragraph 3 supports the idea that white-tailed antelope squirrels and Harris' antelope squirrels have which of the following in common?
They are the two smallest rodents now found in the southwestern United States.
They have white coloring underneath their tails
They cannot cross the Grand Canyon
They cannot survive in desert conditions
The word undergoes in the passage is closest in meaning to 
experiences
allows
prevents
causes
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information
Geographic isolation is sometimes but not always the reason for the creation of reproductive barriers between a parent population and the populations descended from it
Genetic changes in a geographical isolated population do not necessarily make the population look different enough from its parent population to be considered a new species
Geographical isolation allows the separated populations to evolve independently of each other and so can lead to the formation of new species
Geographic isolation can lead to new species only if the gene pool of the isolated population changes enough to prevent it from reproducing with the parent population
According to paragraph 4, why does the size of a population affect the likelihood of allopatric speciation?
Because smaller populations are more likely than larger ones to become geographically isolated
Because the gene pool of a small isolated population is more likely to undergo substantial change than is the gene pool of a larger population
Because a small isolated population can become a new species with substantially less change to its gene pool than would be required by a larger population
Because smaller populations are more likely to be made up of stray animals or plants than larger populations are
The word managed in the passage is closest in meaning to
were able
were forced
arrived
expanded
Paragraph 5 supports the idea that the Galapagos island chain was able to become "one of the world's greatest showcases of evolution" primarily because of
the richness of the volcanic soil of each of the islands in the chain
the distance of the individual islands from each other and from the mainland
the relativity long time it took for the islands to become covered by organisms
the outdoor laboratories that scientists have built on the islands to study evolution
According to paragraph 6, what is true about the thirteen species of Galapagos finches?
All thirteen species are now found on most of the Galapagos Islands
All thirteen species are descended from the same population of ancestral birds
All thirteen species evolved on the island that was originally colonized by finches from the mainland.
All thirteen species occur only in small, completely isolated populations.

Dinosaurs rapidly became extinct about 65 million years ago as part of a mass extinction known as the K-T event, because it is associated with a geological signature known as the K-T boundary, usually a thin band of sedimentation found in various parts of the world (K is the traditional abbreviation for the Cretaceous, derived from the German name Kreidezeit).  Many explanations have been proposed for why dinosaurs became extinct.  For example, some have blamed dinosaur extinction on the development of flowering plants, which were supposedly more difficult to digest and could have caused constipation or indigestion - except that flowering plants first evolved in the Early Cretaceous, about 60 million years before the dinosaurs died out.  In fact, several scientists have suggested that the duckbill dinosaurs and horned dinosaurs, with their complex battery of grinding teeth, evolved to exploit this new resource of rapidly growing flowering plants.  Others have blamed extinction on competition from the mammals, which allegedly ate all the dinosaur eggsexcept that mammals and dinosaurs appeared at the same time in the Late Triassic, about 190 million years ago, and there is no reason to believe that mammals suddenly acquired a taste for dinosaur eggs after 120 million years of coexistence. Some explanations (such as the one stating that dinosaurs all died of diseases) fail because there is no way to scientifically test them, and they cannot move beyond the realm of speculation and guesswork.
This focus on explaining dinosaur extinction misses an important point: the extinction at the end of the Cretaceous was a global event that killed off organisms up and down the food chain. It wiped out many kinds of plankton in the ocean and many marine organisms that lived on the plankton at the base of the food chain. These included a variety of clams and snails, and especially the ammonites, a group of shelled squidlike creatures that dominated the Mesozoic seas and had survived many previous mass extinctions. The K-T event marked the end of the marine reptiles, such as the mosasaurs and the plesiosaurs, which were the largest creatures that had ever lived in the seas and which ruled the seas long before whales evolved. On land, there was also a crisis among the land plants, in addition to the disappearance of dinosaurs. So any event that can explain the destruction of the base of the food chain (plankton in the ocean, plants on land) can better explain what happened to organisms at the top of the food chain, such as the dinosaurs. By contrast, any explanation that focuses strictly on the dinosaurs completely misses the point. The Cretaceous extinctions were a global phenomenon, and dinosaurs were just a part of a bigger picture.
According to one theory, the Age of Dinosaurs ended suddenly 65 million years ago when a giant rock from space plummeted to Earth. Estimated to be ten to fifteen kilometers in diameter, this bolide (either a comet or an asteroid) was traveling at cosmic speeds of 20-70 kilometers per second, or 45,000-156,000 miles per hour. Such a huge mass traveling at such tremendous speeds carries an enormous amount of energy. When the bolide struck this energy was released and generated a huge shock wave that leveled everything for thousands of kilometers around the impact and caused most of the landscape to burst into flames. The bolide struck an area of the Yucatan Peninsula of Mexico known as Chicxulub, excavating a crater 15-20 kilometers deep and at least 170 kilometers in diameter. The impact displaced huge volumes of seawater, causing much flood damage in the Caribbean. Meanwhile, the bolide itself excavated 100 cubic kilometers of rock and debris from the site, which rose to an altitude of 100 kilometers. Most of it fell back immediately, but some of it remained as dust in the atmosphere for months. This material, along with the smoke from the fires, shrouded Earth, creating a form of nuclear winter. According to computerized climate models, global temperatures fell to near the freezing point, photosynthesis halted, and most plants on land and in the sea died. With the bottom of the food chain destroyed, dinosaurs could not survive.
 
In paragraph 1, why does the author include a discussion of when flowering plants evolved?
To help explain why some scientists believe that the development of flowering plants led to dinosaur extinction
To cast doubt on the theory that the development of flowering plants caused dinosaurs to become extinct
To suggest that dinosaurs were able to survive for as long as they did because of the availability of flowering plants
To emphasize that duckbill dinosaurs and horned dinosaurs were the first dinosaurs to become extinct
The word allegedly in the passage is closest in meaning to
inevitably
gradually
supposedly
increasingly
According to paragraph 1, the extinction of the dinosaurs is unlikely to have been the result of competition from mammals because
mammals would not have been capable of eating dinosaur eggs
mammals did not appear in any significant numbers until after the Late Triassic
mammals and dinosaurs did not, in fact, compete for any of the same resources
mammals and dinosaurs lived together for roughly 120 million years before the extinction
According to paragraph 2, what is problematic about some scientists' focus on dinosaur extinction?
Dinosaurs became extinct so long ago that no theory about their disappearance can be proven scientifically.
Dinosaurs were not the only organisms that went extinct at the end of the Cretaceous period.
More marine organisms went extinct during the Cretaceous than did dinosaur species.
It is more important to understand how plankton and other marine organisms came to thrive during the Cretaceous period.
According to paragraph 2, each of the following became extinct during the K-T event EXCEPT
early species of whales
marine reptiles
various species of clams
many species of land plants
What makes the extinction of the ammonites especially significant?
They were among the largest creatures that ever lived.
They existed at the lowest level of the food chain.
They had been able to survive in the Mesozoic seas.
They had survived many previous mass extinctions.
The word halted in the passage is closest in meaning to
slowed
stopped
contracted
declined
The word "strictly" in the passage is closest in meaning to
exclusively
mainly
initially
wrongly
The word crisis in the passage is closest in meaning to
collapse
disturbance
critical situation
loss
How does paragraph 3 relate to paragraph 2?
Paragraph 3 provides an alternative explanation to the one provided in paragraph 2.
Paragraph 3 provides an explanation that satisfies the conditions set forth in paragraph 2.
Paragraph 3 provides the facts to support the theory presented in paragraph 2.
Paragraph 3 presents a theory that calls into question the position described in paragraph 2.
Paragraph 3 answers all of the following questions EXCEPT
Why did the bolide fall to Earth?
How fast was the bolide traveling?
How was the bolide capable of generating a shock wave?
How did the bolide cause flood damage to the Caribbean?
Paragraph 3 strongly suggests that if the bolide impact theory is correct, the majority of the extinctions associated with the K-T event resulted from
sunlight being blocked for months by dust and smoke in Earth's atmosphere
widespread flooding that followed the displacement of huge volumes of seawater
the leveling of the landscape by the shock wave that was generated when the bolide struck Earth
the rise in global temperatures caused by the fires that burned much of the landscape

The forked tongue of snakes has intrigued people for millennia, inspiring many hypotheses. In many cultures and religions, the forked tongue symbolizes malevolence and deceit. The first person known to inquire about the functional significance of the forked tongue was Aristotle; he suggested that it would double the pleasure of sensations of taste. By the beginning of the twentieth century, the consensus was that the snakes tongue is a tactile organ; that is, the snake uses it to tap the ground much as a blind person uses a cane.
In 1920 Browman suggested what seemed to be a winning hypothesis: When the snake retracts its tongue, the tips (or tines) of the forked tongue are inserted into openings on both sides of the roof of the mouth; through these openings chemical stimuli reach special organs that help snakes detect smellsthe vomeronasal organs (VNO). These organs are highly developed in snakes, lizards, and many mammals. They are a second system for detecting smells that appears to have evolved specifically to detect pheromones, the chemical signals that animals secrete as messages to other animals of their species. Browman suggested that the forked tongue flicks out, picking up chemical signals, and then delivers these to the VNO. This hypothesis was widely accepted into the 1980s. Then X-ray movie studies of tongue flicks in snakes and lizards with forked tongues disproved the hypothesis; they showed that when the tongue is withdrawn into the mouth, it enters a sheath and the tips do not go into the openings to the VNO. Instead, the chemical molecules are deposited on pads at the bottom of the mouth, and closing the mouth presses the pads and molecules against the VNO openings.
If the tongue is not forked to fit into the VNO, then what function could the forked shape serve? Schwenk proposes a solution that encompasses observations from several fieldsanimal behavior, ecology, sensory physiology, and neuroanatomy. He hypothesizes that the forked tongue allows the snake to sense chemical stimuli at two points simultaneously, thereby giving it the ability to detect differences in an odor trail.Obtaining two simultaneous readings enhances the ability of the snake to detect the edges of odor trails, and thus to follow pheromone trails accurately. This ability is important in seeking both prey and mates.
This spatial chemical perception is like other systems for spatial perception that are based on simultaneous stimulation of two separated sense organsfor example, auditory localization, which depends on differential stimulation at the two ears. Similarly, the use of the two eyes permits stereovision.
Several kinds of evidence support the hypothesis that forked tongues evolved as chemosensory edge detectors to enhance the ability to follow odor trails: (1) Snakes and lizards spread the tines of their tongue apart when they retrieve odor molecules, then draw the tines together when retracting the tongue. The greater the distance between sampling points, the better the animals sample differences within an odor trail.  (2) Lizards that forage widely have forked tongues, whereas lizard species without forked tongues tend not to forage widely.  (3) Forked tongues have evolved independently at least twice in different families of reptiles, indicating their value as an adaptation.  (4) In the snake nervous system, each tine of the tongue is linked to a nucleus in the other side of the brain, and the two nuclei are linked across the two hemispheres. This arrangement is similar to the anatomy of auditory centers in mammals and birds that permits the computation of differences between what one ear hears and what the other ear hears and thus mediates auditory localization. 
Species in other orders have also evolved paired chemical receptors to guide individuals to mates or prey. For example, male gypsy moths have large, elaborate, odor-detecting antennae with which they track potential mates over large distances, and the ant nest beetle has spoon-shaped antennae extending from each side of the head with which it detects and follows the pheromones of the ants that are its food.
 
The word secrete in the passage is closest in meaning to
hide
intend
produce
collect
According to paragraph 2,what was discovered as a result of X-ray movie studies of snakes and lizards?
The two tines of the forked tongue flick out to pick up chemical signals.
VNO are highly developed in snakes and lizards.
Snakes and lizards cannot accurately detect the pheromones of animals of other species.
The snake's tongue deposits chemical molecules on pads at the bottom of the snake's mouth.
The word simultaneously in the passage is closest in meaning to
in a similar manner
at the same time
at some distance from each other
with great skill
According to Schwenk's hypothesis as presented in paragraphs 3 and 4, what is theadvantage of a snakes forked tongue?
A forked tongue increases the reliability of odor perception because each tine can function as a check to confirm what the other tine senses
Having a forked tongue, like having two ears or eyes, has the advantage that if one tine becomes disabled the snake can still perceive the environment with the other tine.
With a forked tongue, one tine is able to sense the odor of a mate, while at the same time the other tine can be used to track a prey animal.
A forked tongue allows a snake to follow pheromone trails accurately by detecting differences between the two slightly different areas that the left and right tines sense.
According to paragraph 5, snakes and lizards are greatly aided in following odortrails by
sampling odor trails only when they stop moving
using their forked tongue to check information from other sensory detectors
keeping the tines of their tongue widely apart when retrieving odor molecules
folding the tines of the tongue together when withdrawing it into the mouth
Which of the following is presented in paragraph 5 as evidence supporting the hypothesisthat forked tongues evolved to enhance the ability to follow odor trails?
The forked tongue adaptation has evolved separately more than once.
How far snakes and lizards spread the tines of their tongues depends on the type of odor trail they are following.
There are many more lizard species with forked tongues than without forked tongues.
In snakes, the chief value of the forked tongue is in finding a mate.
It can be inferred from paragraph 5 that the tines of the tongue in snakes areconnectedto the nervous system in such a way that
the tines also serve as the snakes means of auditory localization
information about which signal came from which tine is eventually lost
a comparison between what one tine picks up and what the other tine picks up is possible
the two hemispheres of the brain contain exactly the same sensory information
Why does the author talk about gypsy moths and the ant nest beetle?
To emphasize that the search for mates and prey is often a matter of following odor trails
To point out that chemosensory perception in snakes and lizards is not very highly developed
To make the point that snakes and lizards are not unique in having paired chemical receptors
To show that the work done by the forked tongue is more typically done by special antennae

The Navajo, a Native American people living in the southwestern United States, live in small scattered settlements. In many respects, such as education, occupation, and leisure activities, their life is like that of other groups that contribute to the diverse social fabric of North American culture in the twenty-first century. At the same time, they have retained some traditional cultural practices that are associated with particular art forms. For example, the most important traditional Navajo rituals include the production of large floor paintings. These are actually made by pouring thin, finely controlled streams of colored sands or pulverized vegetable and mineral substances, pollen, and flowers in precise patterns on the ground. The largest of these paintings may be up to 5.5 meters in diameter and cover the entire floor of a room. Working from the inside of the design outward, the Navajo artist and his assistants will sift the black, white, bluish-gray, orange, and red materials through their fingers to create the finely detailed imagery.   The paintings and chants used in the ceremonies are directed by well-trained artists and singers who enlist the aid of spirits who are impersonated by masked performers.   The twenty-four known Navajo chants can be represented by up to 500 sand paintings.  These complex paintings serve as memory aids to guide the singers during the performance of the ritual songs, which can last up to nine days. 
The purpose and meaning of the sand paintings can be explained by examining one of the most basic ideals of Navajo society, embodied in their word hozho (beauty or harmony, goodness, and happiness). It coexists with hochxo ("ugliness," or "evil," and "disorder") in a world where opposing forces of dynamism and stability create constant change. When the world, which was created in beauty, becomes ugly and disorderly, the Navajo gather to perform rituals with songs and make sand paintings to restore beauty and harmony to the world. Some illness is itself regarded as a type of disharmony. Thus, the restoration of harmony through a ceremony can be part of a curing process.
Men make sand paintings that are accurate copies of paintings from the past. The songs sung over the paintings are also faithful renditions of songs from the past. By recreating these arts, which reflect the original beauty of creation, the Navajo bring beauty to the present world. As relative newcomers to the Southwest, a place where their climate, neighbors, and rulers could be equally inhospitable, the Navajo created these art forms to affect the world around them, not just through the recounting of the actions symbolized, but through the beauty and harmony of the artworks themselves. The paintings generally illustrate ideas and events from the life of a mythical hero, who, after being healed by the gods, gave gifts of songs and paintings. Working from memory, the artists re-create the traditional form of the image as accurately as possible.
The Navajo are also world-famous for the designs on their woven blankets. Navajo women own the family flocks, control the shearing of the sheep, the carding, the spinning, and dyeing of the thread, and the weaving of the fabrics. While the men who make faithful copies of sand paintings from the past represent the principle of stability in Navajo thought, women embody dynamism and create new designs for every weaving they make. Weaving is a paradigm of the creativity of a mythic ancestor named Spider woman who wove the universe as a cosmic web that united earth and sky. It was she who, according to legend, taught Navajo women how to weave. As they prepare their materials and weave, Navajo women imitate the transformations that originally created the world.
Working on their looms, Navajo weavers create images through which they experience harmony with nature. It is their means of creating beauty and thereby contributing to the beauty, harmony, and healing of the world. Thus, weaving is a way of seeing the world and being part of it.
 
The word precise is closest in meaning to
colorful
exact
delicate
complex
The word enlist" in the passage is closest in meaning to
assist
require
describe
recruit
What can be inferred from paragraph 1 about the Navajo ritual chants?
There is a large number of them.
Each of them corresponds to a particular sand painting.
They are difficult to remember.
They do not take long to perform
According to paragraph 1, all of the following are true of many important Navajo rituals EXCEPT
They involve the creation of large, detailed images.
They include performers whose faces are covered.
They take place indoors.
They are performed without elaborate planning.
It can be inferred from the discussion of illness and curing in paragraph 2 that
the Navajo consider illness to always have a supernatural cause
rituals involving songs and sand paintings may be used to treat an illness
when a Navajo is ill, ugly and disorderly sand paintings are made
after a serious illness, a Navajo will take part in a ceremony
The word faithful in the passage is closest in meaning to
modern
accurate
wonderful
simplified
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
The Navajo used the symbolism and beauty of their works of art to improve their life in an often inhospitable environment.
The ideas the Navajo hold about symbolism and beauty were influenced by their inhospitable climate, neighbors, and rulers.
When they first arrived in the Southwest, the Navajo produced symbolic art forms that promoted harmony.
In their works of art, the Navajo emphasized beauty and harmony that can be found even under the most inhospitable circumstances.
According to paragraph 3, which of the following is often the subject of Navajo sand paintings?
The landscape of the Southwest
Traditional Navajo practices
Historical events that occurred in the Southwest
The lives of heroes in traditional Navajo stories
Paragraph 4 supports which of the following statements about Navajo weavers and weaving?
Navajo women oversee all aspects of wool production and weaving.
The wool used for blankets comes from different sheep than does the wool used for other purposes.
Navajo weavers have used some of the same designs for hundreds of years.
Weaving is done primarily for use in rituals.
The word ancestor in the passage is closest in meaning to 
relative from an earlier generation
person who established a particular tradition in a society
hero from ancient times
person who once made important contributions to a social group or culture
Why does the author discuss a mythic ancestor?
To show how Navajo ideas of weaving have changed over time
To explain why the Navajo principle of stability is more clearly represented in their weavings than in their sand paintings
To emphasize the role of naturally occurring weaving materials in the creative weavings of the Navajo
To help explain the significance of weaving in Navajo culture
According to paragraph 4, Navajo weavers imitate
traditional weaving patterns
patterns used in sand paintings
the activities through which the world was created
images from nature

Bartering was a basic trade mechanism for many thousands of years; often sporadic and usually based on notions of reciprocity, it involved the mutual exchange of commodities or objects between individuals or groups. Redistribution of these goods through society lay in the hands of chiefs, religious leaders, or kin groups. Such redistribution was a basic element in chiefdoms. The change from redistribution to formal tradeoften based on regulated commerce that perhaps involved fixed prices and even currencywas closely tied to growing political and social complexity and hence to the development of the state in the ancient world.
In the 1970s, a number of archaeologists gave trade a primary role in the rise of ancient states. British archaeologist Colin Renfrew attributed the dramatic flowering of the Minoan civilization on Crete and through the Aegean to intensified trading contacts and to the impact of olive and vine cultivation on local communities. As agricultural economies became more diversified and local food supplies could be purchased both locally and over longer distances, a far-reaching economic interdependence resulted. Eventually, this led to redistribution systems for luxuries and basic commodities, systems that were organized and controlled by Minoan rulers from their palaces. As time went on, the self-sufficiency of communities was replaced by mutual dependence. Interest in long-distance trade brought about some cultural homogeneity from trade and gift exchange, and perhaps even led to piracy. Thus, intensified trade and interaction, and the flowering of specialist crafts, in a complex process of positive feedback, led to much more complex societies based on palaces, which were the economic hubs of a new Minoan civilization.
Renfrews model made some assumptions that are now discounted. For example, he argued that the introduction of domesticated vines and olives allowed a substantial expansion of land under cultivation and helped to power the emergence of complex society. Many archaeologists and paleobotanists now question this view, pointing out that the available evidence for cultivated vines and olives suggests that they were present only in the later Bronze Age. Trade, nevertheless, was probably one of many variables that led to the emergence of palace economies in Minoan Crete.
American archaeologist William Rathje developed a hypothesis that considered an explosion in long-distance exchange a fundamental cause of Mayan civilization in Mesoamerica. He suggested that the lowland Mayan environment was deficient in many vital resources, among them obsidian, salt, stone for grinding maize, and many luxury materials. All these could be obtained from the nearby highlands, from the Valley of Mexico, and from other regions, if the necessary trading networks came into being. Such connections, and the trading expeditions to maintain them, could not be organized by individual villages. The Maya lived in a relatively uniform environment, where every community suffered from the same resource deficiencies. Thus, argued Rathje, long-distance trade networks were organized through local ceremonial centers and their leaders. In time, this organization became a state, and knowledge of its functioning was exportable, as were pottery, tropical bird feathers, specialized stone materials, and other local commodities.
Rathjes hypothesis probably explains part of the complex process of Mayan state formation, but it suffers from the objection that suitable alternative raw materials can be found in the lowlands. It could be, too, that warfare became a competitive response to population growth and to the increasing scarcity of prime agricultural land, and that it played an important role in the emergence of the Mayan states.
Now that we know much more about ancient exchange and commerce, we know that, because no one aspect of trade was an overriding cause of cultural change or evolution in commercial practices, trade can never be looked on as a unifying factor or as a primary agent of ancient civilization.  Many ever-changing variables affected ancient trade, among them the demand for goods.  There were also the logistics of transportation, the extent of the trading network, and the social and political environment.  Intricate market networks channeled supplies along well-defined routes.  Authorities at both ends might regulate the profits fed back to the source, providing the incentive for further transactions. There may or may not have been a market organization. Extensive long-distance trade was a consequence rather than a cause of complex societies.
 
The word "notions" in the passage is closest in meaning to
ideas
rules
degrees
traditions
According to paragraph 1, what development occurred as political and social complexity increased?
The prices of most commodities rose.
Formal trade emerged.
Chiefs became more powerful
Bartering became the preferred means of trade.
The word diversified in the passage is closest in meaning to
organized
selective
varied
efficient
According to paragraph 2, which of the following controlled the systems of redistribution of goods in ancient Crete?
Local community leaders
Olive growers
Minoan rulers
Long-distance traders
According to paragraph 2, Renfrew believed that one effect of long-distance trade in the Aegean was
a greater effort to control piracy
greater cultural similarity throughout the region
a decline in local olive production
a decline in the use of luxuries for gift exchanges
According to paragraph 3, what was a major problem with Renfrews model?
He overlooked the fact that only the Minoan palaces had access to domesticated vines and olives.
He wrongly assumed that the introduction of domesticated vines and olives led to the cultivation of more land.
Trade in domesticated plants was much more important to the emergence of Minoan palace economies than he thought.
Domesticated vines and olives do not appear to have been available as early as he thought
According to paragraph 4, which of the following was true about ancient Mayan communities?
They each created their own separate trading networks with communities in the nearby highlands.
They all had many luxury materials that they were able to trade for resources that they lacked.
They all needed to obtain a number of important materials through trade with other regions.
They all gradually reduced their trading activities with communities in the Valley of Mexico and developed trading networks with other regions.
What can be inferred from the fact that the Maya lived in a relatively uniform environment?
The communities could not obtain resources they lacked by trading with each other.
The communities ceremonial centers were all organized in much the same way.
Increased competition between the communities to export their local commodities expanded commercial networks beyond the nearby highlands.
Different communities tended to specialize in the production of different commodities.
The word prime in the passage is closest in meaning to
low-lying
easily accessible
unused
high-quality
What is the role of paragraph 5 in relation to paragraph 4?
It restates the hypothesis presented in paragraph 4 and reinforces it with further evidence.
It presents evidence that the hypothesis discussed in paragraph 4 confuses cause and effect.
It presents a critical assessment of the hypothesis presented in paragraph 4.
It explains how the hypothesis discussed in paragraph 4 was initially formulated.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
We now know that ancient trade cannot be considered a main factor in the rise of civilization, because no one aspect of it caused change in culture or commercial practices.
We now know that the growth of civilization was an important factor in causing cultural change and in improving commercial practices.
We now know much more about how ancient trade and commerce led to cultural changes and the evolution of commercial practices.
We now know much more about the main factors and agents that led to ancient civilization, because we know what aspects of trade affected culture and commercial practices.
According to paragraph 6, all of the following statements about trade in ancient civilizations are true EXCEPT
The spread of trade was influenced by many variables, none of which was the main cause.
Political conditions were more important than demand for goods in the development of trade.
Some markets had clearly established trading routes.
The regulation of profits provided incentives for future trade.

One of the most important changes in Greece during the period from 800 B.C. to 500 B.C. was the rise of the polis, or city-state, and each polis developed a system of government that was appropriate to its circumstances. The problems that were faced and solved in Athens were the sharing of political power between the established aristocracy and the emerging other classes, and the adjustment of aristocratic ways of life to the ways of life of the new polis. It was the harmonious blending of all of these elements that was to produce the classical culture of Athens.
Entering the polis age, Athens had the traditional institutions of other Greek protodemocratic states: an assembly of adult males, an aristocratic council, and annually elected officials. Within this traditional framework the Athenians, between 600 B.C. and 450 B.C., evolved what Greeks regarded as a fully fledged democratic constitution, though the right to vote was given to fewer groups of people than is seen in modern times.
The first steps toward change were taken by Solon in 594 B.C., when he broke the aristocracy's stranglehold on elected offices by establishing wealth rather than birth as the basis of office holding, abolishing the economic obligations of ordinary Athenians to the aristocracy, and allowing the assembly (of which all citizens were equal members) to overrule the decisions of local courts in certain cases. The strength of the Athenian aristocracy was further weakened during the rest of the century by the rise of a type of government known as a tyranny, which is a form of interim rule by a popular strongman (not rule by a ruthless dictator as the modern use of the term suggests to us). The Peisistratids, as the succession of tyrants were called (after the founder of the dynasty, Peisistratos), strengthened Athenian central administration at the expense of the aristocracy by appointing judges throughout the region, producing Athens first national coinage, and adding and embellishing festivals that tended to focus attention on Athens rather than on local villages of the surrounding region. By the end of the century, the time was ripe for more change: the tyrants were driven out, and in 508 B.C. a new reformer, Cleisthenes, gave final form to the developments reducing aristocratic control already under way.
Cleisthenes' principal contribution to the creation of democracy at Athens was to complete the long process of weakening family and clan structures, especially among the aristocrats, and to set in their place locality-based corporations called demes, which became the point of entry for all civic and most religious life in Athens. Out of the demes were created 10 artificial tribes of roughly equal population. From the demes, by either election or selection, came 500 members of a new council, 6,000 jurors for the courts, 10 generals, and hundreds of commissioners. The assembly was sovereign in all matters but in practice delegated its power to subordinate bodies such as the council, which prepared the agenda for the meetings of the assembly, and courts, which took care of most judicial matters. Various committees acted as an executive branch, implementing policies of the assembly and supervising, for instance, the food and water supplies and public buildings. This wide-scale participation by the citizenry in the government distinguished the democratic form of the Athenian polis from other less liberal forms.
The effect of Cleisthenes reforms was to establish the superiority of the Athenian community as a whole over local institutions without destroying them. National politics rather than local or deme politics became the focal point. At the same time, entry into national politics began at the deme level and gave local loyalty a new focus: Athens itself. Over the next two centuries the implications of Cleisthenes reforms were fully exploited.
During the fifth century B.C. the council of 500 was extremely influential in shaping policy.   In the next century, however, it was the mature assembly that took on decision-making responsibility.  By any measure other than that of the aristocrats, who had been upstaged by the supposedly inferior "people", the Athenian democracy was a stunning success. Never before, or since, have so many people been involved in the serious business of self-governance.  It was precisely this opportunity to participate in public life that provided a stimulus for the brilliant unfolding of classical Greek culture.  
 
Paragraph 1 supports which of the following statements about the Greek city-states?
Most city-states followed the model provided by Athens.
Most city-states were based on aristocratic rule.
Different types of government and organization were used by different city-states.
By 500 B.C. the city-states were no longer powerful.
According to paragraph 2, Athens had all of the following before becoming a city-state EXCEPT
a council made up of aristocrats
an assembly made up of men
a constitution that was fully democratic
officials who were elected yearly
According to paragraph 3, an important effect of making wealth the basis of office holding was to
make fewer people qualified to be members of the assembly
make it possible for non-aristocrats to hold office
help the aristocrats maintain power
Increase economic opportunities for all Athenian citizens
The word abolishing in the passage is closest in meaning to
limiting
eliminating
revising
supervising
In paragraph 3, the author's explanation of the word tyranny indicates that
most Athenians were opposed to rule by the Peisistratids
the word had a somewhat different meaning for the Athenians than it does for people today
the tyrants were supported by the aristocracy
the word can be applied only to ruthless dictators
According to paragraph 3, all of the following were true of the Peisistratids' rule EXCEPT
A national system of coins was created.
Judges were appointed across the region.
New festivals were added.
Increased attention was focused on local villages.
The word embellishing in the passage is closest in meaning to
making more attractive
providing support for
duplicating
controlling
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Cleisthenes, a reformer who recognized that aristocratic control had been decreasing since the end of the previous century, finally drove the tyrants out of Athens in 508 B.C.
The tyrants were driven out, and in 508 B.C. Cleisthenes put in place the structures that completed the weakening of the aristocracy.
By driving out the tyrants, Cleisthenes enabled the reforms that had been under way since the end of the century to reach their final form in 508 B.C.
Toward the end of the century, the tyrants were driven out, and in 508 B.C. Cleisthenes saw that it was time to change the structures that had reduced aristocratic control.
According to paragraph 4, one effect of making the demes the point of entry for civic life was to
ensure that every region had the same number of commissioners
distribute the population more equally throughout the Athens region
limit the number of aristocratic clans
reduce the importance of family connections
According to paragraph 4, one role of the new council was to
determine what issues came before the assembly
prepare the agenda for the courts
carry out the assemblys policies
oversee the distribution of food and water
The word exploited in the passage is closest in meaning to
separated
understood
utilized
exported
The word stunning in the passage is closest in meaning to
popular
universal
impressive
continuing

When we look at the way in which biodiversity (biological diversity) is distributed over the land surface of the planet, we find that it is far from even. The tropics contain many more species overall than an equivalent area at the higher latitudes. This seems to be true for many different groups of animals and plants.  
Why is it that higher latitudes have lower diversities than the tropics?   Perhaps it is simply a matter of land area.   The tropics contain a larger surface area of land than higher latitudes - a fact that is not always evident when we examine commonly used projections of Earths curved surface, since this tends to exaggerate the areas of land in the higher latitudes - and some biogeographers regard the differences in diversity as a reflection of this effect.   But an analysis of the data by biologist Klaus Rohde does not support this explanation. Although area may contribute to biodiversity, it is certainly not the whole story; otherwise, large landmasses would always be richer in species.
Productivity seems to be involved instead, though perhaps its influence is indirect. Where conditions are most suitable for plant growth - that is, where temperatures are relatively high and uniform and where there is an ample supply of water - one usually finds large masses of vegetation. This leads to a complex structure in the layers of plant material In a tropical rain forest, for example, a very large quantity of plant material builds up above the surface of the ground. There is also a large mass of material, developed below ground as root tissues, but this is less apparent. Careful analysis of the above ground material reveals that it is arranged in a series of layers, the precise number of layers varying with age and the nature of the forest. The arrangement of the biological mass ("biomass") of the vegetation into layered forms is termed its structure (as opposed to its composition, which refers to the species of organisms forming the community). Structure is essentially the architecture of vegetation, and as in the case of tropical forests, it can be extremely complicated.In a mature floodplain tropical forest in the Amazon River basin, the canopy (the uppermost layers of a forest, formed by the crowns of trees) takes on a stratified structure. There are three clear peaks in leaf cover at heights of approximately 3, 6, and 30 meters above the ground; and the very highest layer, at 50 meters, corresponds to the very tall trees that stand free of the main canopy and form an open layer of their own. So, such a forest contains essentially four layers of canopy. Forests in temperate lands often have just two canopy layers, so they have much less complex architecture.
Structure has a strong influence on the animal life inhabiting a site. It forms the spatial environment within which an animal feeds, moves around shelters, lives, and breeds. It even affects the climate on a very local level (the "microclimate") by influencing light intensity, humidity, and both the range and extremes of temperature. An area of grassland vegetation with very simple structure, for example, has a very different microclimate at the ground level from that experienced in the upper canopy. Wind speeds are lower, temperatures are lower during the day (but warmer at night), and the relative humidity is much greater near the ground. The complexity of the microclimate is closely related to the complexity of structure in vegetation, and generally speaking, the more complex the structure of vegetation, the more species of animal are able to make a living there. The high plant biomass of the tropics leads to a greater spatial complexity in the environment, and this leads to a higher potential for diversity in the living things that can occupy a region. The climates of the higher latitudes are generally less favorable for the accumulation of large quantities of biomass; hence, the structure of vegetation is simpler and the animal diversity is consequently lower.
 
Which of the following is NOT mentioned in paragraph 4 as an aspect of microclimate?
Temperature range
Relative humidity
Light intensity
Seasonal variations
The word distributed in the passage is closest in meaning to
represented
collected
spread
managed
The word overall in the passage is closest in meaning to
considered as a whole
to some degree
possibly
evidently
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Some biogeographers believe that the tropics have larger surface areas than they actually do because of the distortions produced by projections of Earths curved surface.
High levels of diversity in the tropics are sometimes attributed to the fact that the tropics have more surface area of land than the higher latitudes do, though distortions in commonly used projections may seem to suggest otherwise.
Because biogeographers disagree on whether or not the tropics are correctly represented in projections of Earth s surface, it is difficult to determine the relationship their surface area has to their diversity.
Most biogeographers agree that the tropics contain a larger surface area of land than higher latitudes dobut they disagree on whether or not the tropics level of diversity is a reflection of that larger surface area.
Why does the author mention Klaus Rohde in the passage?
To support the argument that large landmasses are usually richer in species than smaller ones are
To introduce the argument that there are other factors contributing to species diversity besides land area
To cast doubt on whether the tropics actually contain higher species diversity than land at higher latitudes does
To emphasize that biogeographers and biologists differ in their approaches to biodiversity
Which of the following is NOT mentioned in paragraph 3 as a condition that benefits plant growth?
High temperatures
Steady temperatures
High latitude
Plentiful water
The word precise in the passage is closest in meaning to
exact
predicted
approximate
required
Paragraph 3 mentions which of the following as creating the structural complexity of a forest?
The height of the very tallest trees in the forest
The number of layers of canopy
The frequency of floods along the plain
The age of the root tissues below the ground
According to paragraph 3, which of the following statements best describes the difference between structure and composition?
Structure refers to the arrangement of plant material above the ground surface; composition refers to the arrangement of root tissues below the surface of the ground.
Structure refers to the age of the forest; composition refers to the forest's nature.
Structure refers to the arrangement of plant species in an area; composition refers to which plant species are present in the area.
Structure refers to the shape of the forest canopy; composition refers to the number of crowns forming the canopy.
Why does the author mention "mature floodplain tropical forest in the Amazon River basin" in the passage?
To dispute the idea that tropical forests are arranged in layers
To give an example of the complex architecture vegetation displays in a dense area
To suggest that the layers of canopy in some tropical forests can exceed the usual three or four
To emphasize that the layers of canopy in a tropical forest give evidence of the number of layers of root tissues below the ground
What can be inferred from paragraph 4 about a region with a high level of diversity of animal species?
It also has a high level of plant species diversity.
It has relatively few microclimates
It develops a less complex structure than does a region with a high plant species diversity.
It develops a biomass similar to that of higher latitudes
The word consequently in the passage is closest in meaning to
usually
obviously
however
therefore

In contrast to mammals and birds, amphibians are unable to produce thermal energy through their metabolic activity, which would allow them to regulate their body temperature independent of the surrounding or ambient temperature. However, the idea that amphibians have no control whatsoever over their body temperature has been proven false because their body temperature does not always correspond to the surrounding temperature. While amphibians are poor thermoregulators, they do exercise control over their body temperature to a limited degree.
Physiological adaptations can assist amphibians in colonizing habitats where extreme conditions prevail. The tolerance range in body temperature represents the range of temperatures within which a species can survive. One species of North American newt is still active when temperatures drop to -2C while one South American frog feels comfortable even when temperatures measured to 41C - the highest body temperature measured in a free-ranging amphibian.   Recently it has been shown that some North American frog and toad species can survive up to five days with a body temperature of -6C with approximately one-third of their body fluids frozen.   The other tissues are protected because they contain the frost-protective agents glycerin or glucose.   Additionally, in many species the tolerance boundaries are flexible and can change as a result of acclimatization (long-term exposure to particular conditions). 
Frog species that remain exposed to the sun despite high diurnal (daytime) temperatures exhibit some fascinating modifications in the skin structure that function as morphological adaptations. Most amphibian skin is fully water permeable and is therefore not a barrier against evaporation or solar radiation. The African savanna frog Hyperolius viridiflavus stores guanine crystals in its skin, which enable it to better reflect solar radiation, thus providing protection against overheating. The tree frog Phyllomedusa sauvagei responds to evaporative losses with gland secretions that provide a greasy film over its entire body that helps prevent desiccation (dehydration).
However, behavior is by far the most important factor in thermoregulation. The principal elements in behavioral thermoregulation are basking (heliothermy), heat exchange with substrates such as rock or earth (thigmothermy), and diurnal and annual avoidance behaviors, which include moving to shelter during the day for cooling and hibernating or estivating (reducing activity during cold or hot weather, respectively). Heliothermy is especially common among frogs and toads: it allows them to increase their body temperature by more than 10C. The Andean toad Bufo spinulosus exposes itself immediately after sunrise on moist ground and attains its preferred body temperature by this means, long before either ground or air is correspondingly warmed. A positive side effect of this approach is that it accelerates the digestion of the prey consumed overnight, thus also accelerating growth. Thigmothermy is a behavior present in most amphibians, although pressing against the ground serves a dual purpose: heat absorption by conductivity and water absorption through the skin. The effect of thigmothermy is especially evident in the Andean toad during rainfall: its body temperature corresponds to the temperature of the warm earth and not to the much cooler air temperature.
Avoidance behavior occurs whenever physiological and morphological adaptations are insufficient to maintain body temperature within the vital range. Nocturnal activity in amphibians with low tolerance for high ambient temperatures is a typical thermoregulatory behavior of avoidance. Seasonal avoidance behavior is extremely important in many amphibians. Species whose habitat lies in the temperate latitudes are confronted by lethal low temperatures in winter, while species dwelling in semiarid regions are exposed to long dry, hot periods in summer.
In amphibians hibernation occurs in mud or deep holes away from frost. North of the Pyrenees Mountains, the natterjack toad offers a good example of hibernation, passing the winter dug deep into sandy ground. Conversely, natterjacks in southern Spain remain active during the mild winters common to the region and are instead forced into inactivity during the dry, hot summer season. Summer estivation also occurs by burrowing into the ground or hiding in cool, deep rock crevasses to avoid desiccation and lethal ambient temperature. Amphibians are therefore hardly at mercy of ambient temperature, since by means of the mechanisms described above they are more than exercise some control over their body temperature.
 
According to paragraph 1, what indicates that amphibians have some control over their body temperature?
Amphibians can regulate their metabolic rates to generate energy.
Amphibians use the same means of thermoregulation as mammals and birds do.
The body temperature of amphibians sometimes differs from the temperature of their surroundings.
The body temperature of amphibians is independent of their metabolic activity.
Why does the author mention a South American frog species in the passage?
To make the point that an amphibians temperature tolerance depends on a number of factors
To indicate how precise the range of body temperatures is for certain amphibians
To contrast its ability to adapt to that of the North American newt
To help illustrate the range of environmental conditions to which amphibians have adapted
According to paragraph 2, what allows some North American frog and toad species to survive in ambient temperatures well below freezing?
Their internal body temperatures never fall below -6C.
They do not remain at temperatures below freezing for very long periods of time.
Their tolerance boundaries are flexible
Some of their body tissues contain substances that prevent freezing.
Phyllomedusa sauvagei is mentioned as an example of a frog with an adaptation that
protects its glandular system
helps reduce its secretions
increases the amount of solar radiation that its skin can reflect
modifies its skin structure to protect against the drying effects of the sun
Paragraph 4 mentions each of the following as an example of behavioral thermoregulation EXCEPT
pressing against the ground
speeding up of the metabolism
reducing activity during the summer
adjusting exposure to the sun
The Andean toad Bufo spinulosus illustrates which of the following behavioral modifications?
Heliothermy and thigmothermy
Diurnal avoidance behavior
Absorbing heat from the air
Moving to shelter during the summer
The word attains in the passage is closest in meaning to
raises
lowers
reaches
regulates
The phrase this approach in the passage refers to
gradually increasing body temperature by 10C
basking as soon as the sun comes up
waiting for the ground and air to warm
keeping body temperature above the temperature of the air
According to paragraph 5, why is avoidance behavior important for some amphibians?
Amphibians habitats are areas where temperatures vary from day to day.
Amphibians have less tolerance for high ambient temperatures than for low ambient temperatures.
Amphibians lack adequate physiological adaptations for dealing with ambient temperatures.
Amphibians cannot protect themselves from the extreme summer heat by being active only at night.
The word dwelling in the passage is closest in meaning to
arriving
originating
evolving
living
In paragraph 6, which of the following can be inferred from the discussion of the natterjack?
Amphibians have greater tolerance for heat than for cold.
Desiccation is not a threat to amphibians
Both hibernation and estivation may serve as avoidance behaviors depending on the climate
Some species of amphibians are active only in the spring and in the fall
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Thus, although amphibians use the various mechanisms described above, they have hardly any control of their body temperature
Thus, by the mechanisms described above, amphibians are quite capable of controlling their body temperature to survive extreme ambient temperatures.
Thus, unless they can use the mechanisms described above, amphibians are at the mercy of ambient temperatures.
Thus, the mechanisms described above give amphibians control over much more than just their body temperature

Between 80 and 85 million years ago, Gondwanaland, a giant continent made up of what today is Africa, Antarctica, Australia, and South America, broke up, thus causing what is now New Zealand to become separated from the larger landmass. After the separation, any creature unable to cross a considerable distance of ocean could not migrate to New Zealand. Snakes and most mammals evolved after the separation. Thus there are no New Zealand snakes, and bats, which flew there, and seals, which swam there, were the only mammals on New Zealand when Polynesian settlers (the Maori) arrived there about a thousand years ago.
When the Maori arrived in New Zealand, they encountered birds that had been evolving for 80 million years without the presence of mammalian predators.   The most striking of these animals must have been moa.  Now extinct, moa were gigantic wingless birds that stood as much as 10 feet (3 meters) tall and weighed as much as 550 pounds (250 kilograms).  They are known from a diverse array of remains including eggshells, eggs, a few mummified carcasses, vast numbers of bones, and some older fossilized bone.  The species of moa that are currently recognized occupied ecological niches customarily filled elsewhere by large mammalian browsing herbivores. They may have had relatively low reproductive rates; apparently, they usually laid only one egg at a time.
It seems possible that when Captain James Cook first visited New Zealand in 1769, moa (or at least one of the moa species) may have still survived in the remote areas in the western part of New Zealand's South Island. If so, these individuals would have been the last of their kind. Climatic conditions in New Zealand appear to have been relatively stable over the period during which moa became extinct. Different factors could have worked in concert to account for their abrupt disappearance.
Vegetation was considerably altered by the Maori occupation of New Zealand, a change not easily explained by climate variation or other possible factors. Forest and shrubland burning appears to have reduced the prime habitat of many moa species. However, the main forest burning started around 700 years ago, after what current archaeological evidence indicates was the most intensive stage of moa hunting. While there appears to have been extensive burning on the east side of New Zealand's South Island, large forest tracts remained in the most southern part of the island. Because major habitat destruction seems to have occurred after moa populations already were depleted, and because some habitat that could have sheltered moa populations remained, it would seem that other factors were also at work in the extinction of these birds.
For South Island, human predation appears to have been a significant factor in the depletion of the population of moa. At one excavated Maori site, moa remains filled six railway cars. The density of Maori settlements and artifacts increased substantially at the time of the most intensive moa hunting (900 to 600 years ago). This period was followed by a time of decline in the Maori population and a societal transition to smaller, less numerous settlements. The apparent decline fits the pattern expected as a consequence of the Maori's overexploitation of moa.
Finally, the Maori introduced the Polynesian rat and the dog to New Zealand. The actions of these potential nest predators could have reduced moa populations without leaving much direct evidence. The Maori may have also inadvertently brought pests and disease organisms in fowls, which could have crossed over to eradicate moa populations. The possibility of analyzing ancient DNA to identify past diseases of extinct animals is being explored. However, evidence of such diseases is difficult to determine directly from paleoecological or archaeological remains. For these reasons, it is hard to determine the likelihood that introduced disease organisms were a cause of the decline of moa, but they are potentially significant.
While the last of these possible causes remains speculative, define clues exist for the action of the first two causes. The story of moa species and their demise raises ecological issues on the vulnerability of species to human-caused changes - including altered vegetative cover of the landscape, change in the physical environment, and modification of the flora and fauna of a region by eliminating some species and introducing others.
 
Paragraph 1 supports which of the following inferences about mammal evolution?
Bats and seals most probably originated in New Zealand and then migrated to other parts of the world.
Most mammal species were already present in Gondwanaland before it broke up, between 80 to 85 million years ago.
No mammals that evolved after New Zealand separated from Gondwanaland were able to migrate to New Zealand.
No mammals evolved from the animals that originally inhabited New Zealand.
The word "striking" in the passage is closest in meaning to
abundant
attention getting
familiar
important
The word "currently" in the passage is closest in meaning to
at the present time 
officially 
normally 
easily
According to paragraph 2, moa
had large wings
hatched many eggs at one time
had no mammals that preyed on them
were ordinarily small in size and light in weight
Why does the author include the information "Climatic conditions in New Zealand appear to have been relatively stable over the period during which moa became extinct"?
To eliminate what might seem to be a plausible explanation of the extinction of moa.
To explain why some moa species may still have existed at the time of Captain Cook's first visit to New Zealand.
To explain why, in the late 1700s, moa most likely lived in remote areas of New Zealand.
To suggest that climate conditions in New Zealand varied widely when moa were plentiful.
The word "abrupt" in the passage is closest in meaning to
gradual
complete
predicted
sudden
According to paragraph 4, why is forest burning considered only a partial explanation for the disappearance of moa?
Forest burning was far less intense on New Zealand's South Island, where the majority of moa habitats were located.
Moa populations had already been significantly reduced before most of the forest burning started.
Moa became extinct long after the Maori had stopped the practice of forest burning.
Moa gradually adapted to changes that resulted from forest burning.
Why does the author say that "At one excavated Maori site, moa remains filled six railway cars"?
To indicate how large the moa population was before it was hunted. 
To indicate that scientists were very interested in learning details about moa. 
To illustrate the intensity with which the Maori hunted moa. 
To suggest that moa hunting was largely limited to New Zealand's South Island.
Paragraph 5 presents which of the following as evidence that hunting was one of the factors responsible for the decline of moa?
The length of the period during which moa were intensively hunted.
The decline in the size of the Maori population in the period after moa were intensively hunted.
The large number of Maori living today in areas that were moa habitats.
The large number of hunting weapons that archaeologists have excavated.
According to paragraph 6, scientists may never know if diseases contributed to the extinction of moa because
previous research to establish the role of diseases in the extinction of animals did not yield any significant findings.
scientists have difficulty identifying past diseases from paleoecological and archaeological data.
moa's fossilized remains contain no DNA.
conducting such research is time-consuming and expensive.
The word "potentially" in the passage is closest in meaning to
historically 
remarkably
possibly
certainly
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
The extinction of moa suggests the vulnerability of species to human-caused changes to the species' environment.
Some species, such a moa, are vulnerable to changes in their environment.
The environmental changes that moa experienced included modifications to plant and animal life and the introduction and elimination of certain animal species.
The story of moa raises issues that are important for ecologists to consider.

It was not until the Cambrian period, beginning about 600 million years ago, that a great proliferation of macroscopic species occurred on Earth and produced a fossil record that allows us to track the rise and fall of biodiversity. Since the Cambrian period, biodiversity has generally risen, but there have been some notable exceptions. Biodiversity collapsed dramatically during at least five periods because of mass extinctions around the globe. The five major mass extinctions receive most of the attention, but they are only one end of a spectrum of extinction events. Collectively, more species went extinct during smaller events that were less dramatic but more frequent. The best known of the five major extinction events, the one that saw the demise of the dinosaurs, is the Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction.
Starting about 280 million years ago, reptiles were the dominant large animals in terrestrial environments. In popular language this was the era when dinosaurs ruled Earth, when a wide variety of reptile species occupying many ecological niches. However, no group or species can maintain its dominance indefinitely, and when, after over 200 million years, the age of dinosaurs came to a dramatic end about 65 million years ago, mammals began to flourish, evolving from relatively few types of small terrestrial animals into the myriad of diverse species, including bats and whales, that we know today. Paleontologists label this point in Earths history as the end of the Cretaceous period and the beginning of the Tertiary period, often abbreviated as the K-T boundary. This time was also marked by changes in many other types of organisms. Overall, about 38 percent of the families of marine animals were lost, with percentages much higher in some groups Ammonoid mollusks went from being very diverse and abundant to being extinct. An extremely abundant set of planktonic marine animals called foraminifera largely disappeared, although they rebounded later. Among plants, the K-T boundary saw a sharp but brief rise in the abundance of primitive vascular plants such as ferns, club mosses, horsetails, and conifers and other gymnosperms. The number of flowering plants (angiosperms) was reduced at this time, but they then began to increase dramatically.
What caused these changes? For many years scientists assumed that a cooling of the climate was responsible, with dinosaurs being particularly vulnerable because, like modern reptiles, they were ectothermic (dependent on environmental heat, or cold-blooded). It is now widely believed that at least some species of dinosaurs had a metabolic rate high enough for them to be endotherms (animals that maintain a relatively consistent body temperature by generating heat internally). Nevertheless, climatic explanations for the K-T extinction are not really challenged by the ideas that dinosaurs may have been endothermic, because even endotherms can be affected by a significant change in the climate.
Explanations for the K-T extinction were revolutionized in 1980 when a group of physical scientists led by Luis Alvarez proposed that 65 million years ago Earth was stuck by a10-kilometer-wide meteorite traveling at 90,000 kilometers per hour. They believed that this impact generated a thick cloud of dust that enveloped Earth, shutting out much of the incoming solar radiation and reducing plant photosynthesis to very low levels. Short-term effects might have included huge tidal waves and extensive fires. In other words, a series of events arising from a single cataclysmic event caused the massive extinctions. Initially, the meteorite theory was based on a single line of evidence.  At locations around the globe, geologists had found an unusually high concentration of iridium in the layer of sedimentary rocks that was formed about 65 million years ago. Iridium is an element that is usually uncommon near Earths surface, but it is abundant in some meteorites. Therefore, Alvarez and his colleagues concluded that it was likely that the iridium in sedimentary rocks deposited at the K-T boundary had originated in a giant meteorite or asteroid. Most scientist came to accept the meteorite theory after evidence came to light that a circular formation, 180 kilometers in diameter and centered on the north coast of the Yucatan Peninsula, was created by a meteorite impact about 65 million years ago.
 
The word proliferation in the passage is closest in meaning to
decline
extinction
increase
migration
Paragraph 1 supports which of the following statements about life on Earth before the Cambrian period?
Biodiversity levels were steady, as indicated by the fossil record.
Levels of biodiversity could not be tracked.
The most dramatic extinction episode occurred.
Few microscopic species existed.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
The dominance of dinosaurs came to an end 65 million years ago, at which time mammals began to flourish and diversify.
Because no group of species can remain dominant forever, mammals became the dominant group when dinosaurs became extinct.
After being the dominant group for more than 200 million years, the age of dinosaurs came to a dramatic end 65 million years ago.
The diverse group of mammals that we know today, including bats and whales, evolved from small terrestrial forms that had been dominated by dinosaurs.
According to paragraph 2, why are dinosaurs popularly said to have ruled Earth during the Cretaceous period?
Dinosaurs were the only species of reptile that existed during the whole of the Cretaceous period.
Dinosaurs won the battle for food resources over mammals during the Cretaceous period.
Dinosaurs survived extinction during the Cretaceous period, whereas many other animal species did not.
Dinosaurs were the physically and ecologically dominant animals during the Cretaceous period.
According to paragraph 2, which of the following species initially increased in number at the K-T boundary?
Dinosaurs
Foraminifera
Ferns
Ammonoid mollusks
Why does the author note that even endotherms can be affected by a significant change in the climate?
To argue that there was a significant climate at the time that endothermic dinosaurs became extinct
To argue that climate change caused some dinosaurs to evolve as endotherms
To support the view that at least some of the dinosaurs that became extinct were endotherms
To defend climate change as possible explanation for the extinction of dinosaurs
The word generated in the passage is closest in meaning to
collected
produced
spread
added
The word extensive in the passage is closest in meaning to
widespread
sudden
numerous
subsequent
According to paragraph 4, all of the following contributed to the massive extinctions of the K-T period EXCEPT:
tidal waves
fires
insufficient solar radiation
iridium
According to paragraph 4, which of the following statements explains the importance of the discovery of high levels of iridium rocks?
It provided evidence that overexposure to solar radiation led to the K-T extinction.
It showed that more than one cataclysmic event was responsible for the K-T extinction.
It suggested that the cause of the K-T extinction may have been a meteorite striking Earth.
It provided evidence that the K-T extinction occurred 65 million years ago.
According to paragraph 4, which of the following is true about the Yucatan Peninsula?
The circular formation there was caused by a meteorite impact 65 million years ago.
Sedimentary rocks from that area have the lowest iridium concentration of any rocks on Earth.
There is evidence that a huge tidal wave occurred there 65 million years ago.
Evidence found there challenged the meteorite impact theory.
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 4 about the meteorite theory?
The data originally presented as evidence for the theory were eventually rejected.
Many scientists did not accept it when it was first proposed.
It has not been widely accepted as an explanation for the K-T extinction.
Alvarez subsequently revised it after a circular formation was found in the Yucatan Peninsula.

Forest fires have recently increased in intensity and extent in some forest types throughout the western United States. This recent increase in fires has resulted partly from climate change (the recent trend toward hot, dry summers) and partly from human activities, for complicated reasons that foresters came increasingly to understand about 30 years ago but whose relative importance is still debated. One factor is the direct effect of logging, which often turns a forest into something approximating a huge pile of kindling (wood for burning): the ground in a logged forest may remain covered with branches and treetops, left behind when the valuable trunks are carted away; a dense growth of new vegetation springs up, further increasing the forest's fuel loads; and the trees logged and removed are of course the biggest and most fire-resistant individuals, leaving behind smaller and more flammable trees.
Another factor is that the United States Forest Service in the first decade of the 1900s adopted the policy of fire suppression (attempting to put out forest fires) for the obvious reason that it did not want valuable timber to go up in smoke, or people's homes and lives to be threatened. The Forest Service's announced goal became "Put out every forest fire by 10:00 A. M. on the morning after the day when it is first reported."  Firefighters became much more successful at achieving that goal after 1945, thanks to improved firefighting technology.   For a few decades the amount of land burnt annually decreased by 80 percent.   That happy situation began to change in the 1980s, due to the increasing frequency of large forest fires that were essentially impossible to extinguish unless rain and low winds combined to help.   People began to realize that the United States federal government's fire-suppression policy was contributing to those big fires and that natural fires caused by lightning had previously played an important role in maintaining forest structure.
The natural role of fire varies with altitude, tree species, and forest type. To make Montana's low-altitude ponderosa pine forest as an example, historical records, plus counts of annual tree rings and datable fire scars on tree stumps, demonstrated that a ponderosa pine forest experiences a lightning-lit fire about once a decade under natural conditions (i.e.., before fire suppression began around 1910 and became effective after 1945). The mature ponderosa trees have bark two inches thick and are relatively resistant to fire, which instead burns out the understory - the lower layer - of fire-sensitive Douglas fir seedlings that have grown up since the previous fire. But after only a decade's growth until the next fire, those young seedling plants are still too low for fire to spread from them into the crowns of the ponderosa pine trees. Hence the fire remains confined to ground and understory. As a result, many natural ponderosa pine forests have a parklike appearance, with low fuel loads, big trees spaced apart, and a relatively clear understory.
However, loggers concentrated on removing those big, old, valuable, fire-resistant ponderosa pines, while fire suppression for decades let the understory fill up with Douglas fir saplings that would in turn become valuable when full-grown. Tree densities increased from 30 to 200 trees per acre, the forest's fuel load increased by a factor of 6, and the government repeatedly failed to appropriate money to thin out the saplings. When a fire finally does start in a sapling-choked forest, whether due to lightning or human carelessness or (regrettably often) intentional arson, the dense, tall saplings (young trees) may become a ladder that allows the fire to jump into the crowns of the trees. The outcome is sometimes an unstoppable inferno.
Foresters now identify the biggest problem in managing Western forests as what to do with those increased fuel loads that built up during the previous half century of effective fire suppression. In the wetter eastern United States, dead trees rot away more quickly than in the drier West, where more dead trees persist like giant matchsticks. In an ideal world, the Forest Service would manage and restore the forests, thin them out, and remove the dense understory by cutting or by controlled small fires. But no politician or voter wants to spend what it would cost to do that.
 
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Climate change caused by human activity is the main reason for the increase in fires over the past 30 years.
While human activity is definitely considered a factor, foresters are still debating whether climate plays a role in the recent increase in fires.
For complicated reasons, over the past 30 years there has been an increase in the number of fires that take place during hot, dry summers.
Both climate change and human activities are responsible for the recent increase in forest fires, although the contributions of those factors are still not agreed on. 
The word "approximating" in the passage is closest in meaning to
containing
surrounding
resembling
providing
All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 1 as consequences of logging that can promote forest fires EXCEPT
Fires are accidentally started by loggers.
Pieces of flammable wood are left behind in the forest.
There is a dense growth of new plants that act as fuel for fire.
The most fire-resistant trees are removed by the loggers.
What can be inferred from paragraph 2 about forest-fire suppression before 1900?
It was more effective than afterward because there were fewer fires to suppress in most regions.
There was no official program of forest-fire suppression in the United States.
Forest-fire suppression was practiced more for the purpose of protecting homes than for protecting forests.
The Forest Service had rules to control forest fires, but the rules were ignored.
Why does the author include the quotation "Put out every forest fire by 10:00 A. M. on the morning after the day when it is first reported"?
To suggest that the Forest Service's goals were unrealistic and ultimately unattainable.
To demonstrate how seriously the Forest Service took their responsibility of fire suppression.
To support the idea that fire-suppression techniques are most effective early in the day.
To provide an example of the new methods that resulted in successful firefighting after 1945.
According to paragraph 3, all of the following have been used to determine the frequency of forest fires under natural conditions in Montana's ponderosa pine forests EXCEPT
recent records of fire-suppression efforts in the region
historical documents
examination of tree rings on burned trees
the dating of scars on remaining stumps of fire-damaged trees
The word "Hence" in the passage is closest in meaning to
Afterward
Therefore
Certainly
In particular
In paragraph 3, what is the author's purpose in describing the natural cycle of fires in ponderosa pine forests?
To emphasize the importance of replanting seedlings after a forest fire.
To argue for increasing the effectiveness of laws to suppress forest fires.
To describe how fire affects a typical ponderosa pine forest in the absence of human intervention.
To explain the long-lasting damage that once occurred in the ponderosa pine forests of Montana before fires were controlled.
According to paragraph 4, why is the human preservation of Douglas fir sapling trees a threat to the ponderosa pine forest?
The presence of many sapling trees makes it more difficult for firefighters to reach the source of a forest fire.
Douglas fir saplings are expensive to maintain, leaving little government money for forest-fire suppression.
Saplings compete for space with the larger and more valuable fire-resistant trees.
Dense areas of tall sapling trees can spread fire to the crowns of larger, fire-resistant trees.
The word "regrettably" in the passage is closest in meaning to
unfortunately
surprisingly
probably
extremely
What does paragraph 5 describe as a solution to the fires in Western forests?
The careful management of forests to reduce the buildup of fuel loads.
The preservation of a dense understory.
The occasional flooding of western forests to make them as wet as those in the East.
A return to the effective methods of fire suppression of the previous half century.
According to paragraph 5, people in the United States would probably not support the described forest-management and restoration techniques because they
think that the use of small, controlled fires may be too dangerous.
do not want to spend money on the expensive process of managing forest understory.
distrust the Forest Service due to the harmful fire-suppression techniques of the past.
do not want politicians involved in forest management.

Colonization is one way in which plants can change the ecology of a site. Colonization is a process with two components: invasion and survival. The rate at which a site is colonized by plants depends on both the rate at which individual organisms (seeds, spores, immature or mature individuals) arrive at the site and their success at becoming established and surviving. Success in colonization depends to a great extent on there being a site available for colonization  a safe site where disturbance by fire or by cutting down of trees has either removed competing species or reduced levels of competition and other negative interactions to a level at which the invading species can become established. For a given rate of invasion, colonization of a moist, fertile site is likely to be much more rapid than that of a dry, infertile site because of poor survival on the latter. A fertile, plowed field is rapidly invaded by a large variety of weeds, whereas a neighboring construction site from which the soil has been compacted or removed to expose a coarse, infertile parent material may remain virtually free of vegetation for many months or even years despite receiving the same input of seeds as the plowed field.
Both the rate of invasion and the rate of extinction vary greatly among different plant species. Pioneer species - those that occur only in the earliest stages of colonization - tend to have high rates of invasion because they produce very large numbers of reproductive propagules (seeds, spores, and so on) and because they have an efficient means of dispersal (normally, wind).
If colonizers produce short-lived reproductive propagules, they must produce very large numbers unless they have an efficient means of dispersal to suitable new habitats. Many plants depend on wind for dispersal and produce abundant quantities of small, relatively short-lived seeds to compensate for the fact that wind is not always a reliable means If reaching the appropriate type of habitat. Alternative strategies have evolved in some plants, such as those that produce fewer but larger seeds that are dispersed to suitable sites by birds or small mammals or those that produce long-lived seeds. Many forest plants seem to exhibit the latter adaptation, and viable seeds of pioneer species can be found in large numbers on some forest floors. For example, as many as 1,125 viable seeds per square meter were found in a 100-year-old Douglas fir/western hemlock forest in coastal British Columbia. Nearly all the seeds that had germinated from this seed bank were from pioneer species. The rapid colonization of such sites after disturbance is undoubtedly in part a reflection of the large seed band on the forest floor.
An adaptation that is well developed in colonizing species is a high degree of variation in germination (the beginning of a seeds growth). Seeds of a given species exhibit a wide range of germination dates, increasing the probability that at least some of the seeds will germinate during a period of favorable environmental conditions. This is particularly important for species that colonize an environment where there is no existing vegetation to ameliorate climatic extremes and in which there may be great climatic diversity.
Species succession in plant communities, i.e., the temporal sequence of appearance and disappearance of species is dependent on events occurring at different stages in the life history of a species.  Variation in rates of invasion and growth plays an important role in determining patterns of succession, especially secondary succession.  The species that are first to colonize a site are those that produce abundant seed that is distributed successfully to new sites. Such species generally grow rapidly and quickly dominate new sites, excluding other species with lower invasion and growth rates. The first community that occupies a disturbed area therefore may be composed of specie with the highest rate of invasion, whereas the community of the subsequent stage may consist of plants with similar survival rates but lower invasion rates. 
 
According to paragraph 1, how does disturbance of a site influence its colonization by a plant species?
Disturbance reduces or eliminates competition by other species.
Disturbance increases negative interactions with other organisms on the site.
Disturbance prevents a plant species from colonizing a new site.
Disturbance reduces the fertility of a site.
The word virtually in the passage is closest in meaning to
almost totally
unusually
consistently
unnaturally
Why does the author mention a plowed field and a construction site in the passage?
To argue that sites that have been affected by human activity tend to be colonized slowly
To illustrate the kind of sites that may be invaded by weeds
To contrast sites in terms of their suitability for colonization
To explain that exposing or compacting the soil results in successful colonization
The word despite in the passage is closest in meaning to
without
almost never
even though
perhaps
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
The seeds of pioneer species are usually carried by the wind to fertile sites, where they reproduce very efficiently.
Pioneer species are successful invaders because they produce lots of seeds that are dispersed effectively.
Pioneer species produce their largest numbers of propagules during the earliest stages of their colonization.
Pioneer species reproduce very quickly and efficiently because they produce very large number of seeds.
What can be inferred from paragraph 3 about the reason that large seeds are dispersed by birds or small animals rather than by wind?
Large seeds are easier for birds and animals to see than are the small seeds dispersed by the wind.
Large seeds are too heavy for the wind to disperse.
Large seeds cannot be eaten by birds and animals.
Large seeds are short-lived and thus require a more efficient means of dispersal than small seeds do.
The phrase the latter adaptation in the passage refers to
producing fewer seeds
producing larger seeds
dispersal by birds and small mammals
producing long-lived seeds
The word viable in the passage is closest in meaning to
able to survive
individual
large
remaining
The example of the 100-year-old Douglas fir/western hemlock forest in paragraph to illustrates which of the following ideas?
It is uncommon for older seed to germinate.
Pioneer species tend to prefer forest floors for colonization purposes.
Long-lived seeds of pioneer species can successfully germinate over long periods of time.
Coastal British Columbia is particularly suited for pioneer species to develop.
According to paragraph 4, how do plants manage to germinate in areas with great climatic diversity and climatic extremes?
By producing seeds only during favorable climatic conditions
By generating large numbers of seeds
By colonizing only those areas where other plants have survived
By producing seeds that have a wide range of germination dates
The word abundant in the passage is closest in meaning to
new
improved
suitable
plentiful
According to paragraph 5, which of the following determines the sequence in which plant species will colonize a site?
The extent of growth of a species on a prior site before it begins to colonize a secondary site
The differences in invasion and growth rates across species
The degree of fertility of a site
The kind of disturbance that the site has undergone

The palaces built by the Minoan people of Crete (an island in the eastern Mediterranean) between 1950 B.C. and 1450 B.C. were centers of power, both sacred and secular, with wealth based on the stores of agricultural produce from the fertile hinterland that they controlled.  What happened within them?  Presumably they were busy places.  The receipt, recording, and storage of goods brought in from the surrounding countryside must have been a major job, particularly at those tunes of the year when the corn was harvested, the olive ripe, or the wine newly made.  Administration of the goods and commodities leaving the storerooms for consumption in the palace, for use in the workshops, or for wider distribution must have taken place throughout the year.  We may imagine the storage areas as busy by day, and probably carefully guarded at night.
The craft workers creating precious works in such materials as gold, Ivory, and semiprecious stones may well have been fulltime craft specialists, totally dependent on the palaces and working constantly within them, their products in demand both tor immediate use and possibly foe exchange quite far afield.  Their raw materials were part of palatial wealth, and must have been kept under strict control.  Similarly bronze workers, whose raw material would have been carefully recorded, no doubt worked close by.  Pottery workshops seem to have been further afield, situated near the clay beds and fuel for the kilns (pottery ovens) rather than within palace confines, though their products could still have been largely or totally under palace control.  The production of textiles was probably always an important palace-based activity, though we do not know in which rooms, precisely, spinning and weaving took place.
Some revisionist interpretations of the palace of Knossos have questioned whether people lived within it to any great extent.  We must face squarely the fact, implicit in the above account, that unequivocal evidence for human residence as opposed to human use, is hard to find.  Nonetheless, it seems overwhelmingly probable that all the palaces were lived in by some, if not all, of the people engaged in the many activities for which they show evidence. Many nonspecific rooms could have been lived in by various dependents--craft workers, guards, textile workers, servants, or slaves.  This remains true even if we follow those interpretations that would prefer "temple" to "palace" as the buildings' prime identification.
In fact, the choice of "temple" rather than palace" is a change of emphasis rather than a change of interpretation.  From the early twentieth-century work of archaeologist Arthur Evans onwards, the ingrained and embedded religious nature of the palaces has been accepted, as has the fact that "palace" is inadequate shorthand for the buildings' complexities.  There are, though, good reasons not to change wholesale to "temple" which in truth is similarly inadequate.  The most obvious problem with such a change is the fact that, while a society based on large palaces with no temples has always been recognized as anomalous in the ancient world, large-scale temples with no palaces would be equally so.  Unless there is a truly huge gap in our excavated evidence possible, but as time goes on increasingly unlikely--these complex buildings are all we have.  The most logical conclusion remains that they fulfilled two sets of functions simultaneously.  Accurate terminology that did not privilege one function over another would require the coinage of a portmanteau term such as "palace-temple" or "temple-palace," but this seems an undesirable deviation from terminology that is long established, whatever its shortcomings.
What, though, of the ruling elite, whether priests, kings, or both?  Is there evidence that the palaces housed a royal family? The attempt to see royal apartments throws into high relief not only the difficulty of identifying precisely the function of a room from its form, but also the fact that we do not really know who, in Minoan society, held the reins of power.  The Minoan tradition indicates a king- yet power may have been wielded by a priest, or by a priest-king, combining functions that we would divide into sacred and secular.  Nonetheless, it still seems overwhelmingly likely that the ruling elite lived in the palaces, or perhaps in both the palaces and the important houses in their immediate vicinity.
 
All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 1 as specific activities that occurred within Minoan palaces EXCEPT
the storing of incoming agricultural produce
the distribution of goods to palace workshops
the protection of goods in storerooms against theft
quality inspections of goods made in workshops
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Even though pottery workshops appeared to be located at a distance from the palace, their products may have been largely or totally under palace control.
The palace had a lot more control over the production of pottery workshops than it did over other products, even though pottery workshops were located further afield.
The palace controlled the products from factory workshops as well as their use of raw materials, even though the workshops were far away from the palace.
Unlike other workshops, pottery workshops were located near sources of raw material and fuel rather than within the palace confine.
The word "precisely" in the passage is closest in meaning to
probably
exactly
primarily
ordinarily
According to paragraph 2, what did craft workers using precious materials and textile workers have in common?
They both worked within the palaces.
They both usually kept careful records of the materials they used.
They both shared workshops with bronze workers.
They both made products that were immediately used or exchanged.
According to paragraph 3, which of the following best describes the author's position on the issue of whether people actually lived within Minoan palaces?
Additional archaeological evidence will probably allow archaeologists to determine whether people actually lived in the palaces.
Archaeological evidence suggests that people lived in some but not every Minoan palace.
Dependents who lived in nonspecific rooms within Minoan palaces were the only people that actually lived within the palace.
It is highly likely that at least some people who used Minoan palaces also lived in them.
The word "shortcomings" in the passage is closest in meaning to
dangers
weaknesses
considerations
interpretations
What can be inferred from paragraph 4 about early twentieth-century archaeologist Arthur Evans?
He believed that there was a large gap in the excavated evidence regarding the Minoan palaces.
He argued that the term "temple" should be used in place of the term "palace" for Minoan palaces
He argued that religious activities were an important aspect of life within Minoan palaces.
He demonstrated that nearly all large palaces in the ancient world contained temples.
According to paragraph 5, it is difficult to determine if Minoan palaces included royal apartments in part because
important houses located near palaces have features similar to those of palaces used by royalty
the reins of power in Minoan society were not tightly held by a ruling elite
the royalty and priests were in a constant struggle for control over Minoan society
it is not clear who held power in Minoan society

In the late nineteenth century, political and social changes were occurring rapidly in Siam (now Thailand). The old ruling families were being displaced by an evolving centralized government. These families were pensioned off (given a sum of money to live on) or simply had their revenues taken away or restricted; their sons were enticed away to schools for district officers, later to be posted in some faraway province; and the old patron-client relations that had bound together local societies simply disintegrated. Local rulers could no longer protect their relatives and attendants in legal cases, and with the ending in 1905 of the practice of forcing peasant farmers to work part-time for local rulers, the rulers no longer had a regular base for relations with rural populations. The old local ruling families, then, were severed from their traditional social context.
The same situation viewed from the perspective of the rural population is even more complex. According to the governments first census of the rural population, taken in 1905, there were about thirty thousand villages in Siam. This was probably a large increase over the figure even two or three decades earlier, during the late 1800s. It is difficult to imagine it now, but Siams Central Plain in the late 1800s was nowhere near as densely settled as it is today. There were still forests closely surrounding Bangkok into the last of the nineteenth century, and even at centurys end there were wild elephants and tigers roaming the countryside only twenty or thirty miles away.
Much population movement involved the opening up of new lands for rice cultivation. Two things made this possible and encouraged it to happen. First, the opening of the kingdom to the full force of international trade by the Boring Treaty (1855) rapidly encouraged economic specialization in the growing of rice, mainly to feed the rice-deficient portions of Asia (India and china in particular). The average annual volume of rice exported from Siam grew from under 60 million kilograms per year in the late 1850s to more than 660 million kilograms per year at the turn of the century; and over the same period the average price per kilogram doubled. During the same period, the area planted in rice increased from about 230,000 acres to more than350, 000 acres. This growth was achieved as the result of the collective decisions of thousands of peasants families to expand the amount of land they cultivated, clear and plant new land, or adopt more intensive methods of agriculture.
 They were able to do so because of our second consideration. They were relatively freer than they had been half a century earlier. Over the course of the Fifth Reign (1868  1910), the ties that bound rural people to the aristocracy and local ruling elites were greatly reduced. Peasants now paid a tax on individuals instead of being required to render labor service to the government. Under these conditions, it made good sense to thousands of peasant families to in effect work full-time at what they had been able to do only part-time previously because of the requirement to work for the government: grow rice for the marketplace.

Numerous changes accompanied these developments. The rural population both dispersed and grew, and was probably less homogeneous and more mobile than it had been a generation earlier. The villages became more vulnerable to arbitrary treatment by government bureaucrats as local elites now had less control over them. By the early twentieth century, as government modernization in a sense caught up with what had been happening in the countryside since the 1870s, the government bureaucracy intruded more and more into village life. Provincial police began to appear, along with district officers and cattle registration and land deeds and registration for compulsory military service. Village handicrafts diminished or died out completely as people bought imported consumer goods, like cloth and tools, instead of making them themselves. More economic variation took shape in rural villages, as some grew prosperous from farming while others did not. As well as can be measured, rural standards of living improved in the Fifth Reign. But the statistical averages mean little when measured against the harsh realities of peasant life.
 
The word severed in the passage is closest in meaning to
cut off
viewed
protected
rescued
According to paragraph 1, the situation for Siams old ruling families changed in all of the following ways EXCEPT:
Their incomes were reduced.
Their sons were posted as district officers in distant provinces.
They could sell lands that had traditionally belonged to them.
They had less control over the rural populations.
According to paragraph 2, which of the following was true of Siam in 1905?
Its urban population began to migrate out of the cities and into the country.
Its Central Plain was almost as densely populated as it is today.
It was so rural that wild elephants and tigers sometimes roamed Bangkok.
It had many more villages than it did in the late 1800s.
The phrase rice-deficient portions in the passage is closest in closest in meaning to
the parts that consume rice
the parts that do not have enough rice
the parts where rice is grown
The parts that depend primarily on rice
Paragraph 3 mentions all of the following as signs of economic growth in Siam EXCEPT
an increase in the price or rice
an increase in the amount of rice leaving Siam
an increase in the nutritional quality of the rice grown
an increase in the amount of land used for rice production
According to paragraph 3, farming families increased the amount of rice they grew in part by
growing varieties of rice that produced greater yields
forming collective farms by joining together with other farm families
planting rice in areas that had previously remained unplanted
hiring laborers to help them tend their fields
According to paragraph 4, what happened after the government ended the practice of requiring rural people to perform labor for it?
Rural people became more closely connected to the aristocracy.
Rural people spent more time growing rice for profit.
The government began to pay the laborers who grew rice for it.
The government introduced a special tax on rice.
Which of the following best describes the relationship between paragraphs 3 and 4 in the passage?
Paragraph 4 provides further evidence of the economic growth of Siam discussed in paragraph 3.
Paragraph 4 continues the discussion begun in paragraph 3 of farming improvements that led to economic growth.
Paragraph 4 examines a particular effect of the Bowring Treaty mentioned in paragraph 3.
Paragraph 4 discusses the second of two factors that contributed to the expansion of rice farming mentioned in paragraph 3.
The word dispersed in the passage is closest in meaning to
spread out
gained power
adapted
specialized
The word compulsory in passage is closest in meaning to
foreign
formal
required
preferred
According to paragraph 5, which of the following was true of Siams rural people during the Fifth Reign?
They were forced to spend most of the profits from rice growing on registrations required by the government.
Their lives remained very difficult even though statistics suggest that their quality of life improved.
The non-farmers among them were helped by the government more than the farmers among them were.
They were more prosperous when they were ruled by local elites than when they were ruled by the more modern government of the Fifth Reign.
According to paragraph 5, the government bureaucracy intruded in village life by
requiring the people to register their cattle and land
requiring the people to buy certain kinds of imported goods
discouraging the people from making handicrafts and tools
encouraging more people to take up farming

The city of Venice, on Italys coastline, achieved commercial dominance of southern Europe during the Middle Ages largely because of its extensive trade in the valuable commodity of salt. At first, Venice produced its own salt at its Chioggia saltworks. For a time its principal competitor in the region was the town of Cervia, with Venice having the advantage because Chioggia was more productive. But Chioggia produced a fine-grained salt, so when Venetians wanted coarser salt, they had to import it. Then, in the thirteenth century, after a series of floods and storms destroyed about a third of the salt-producing ponds in Chioggia, the Venetians were forced to import even more salt.
That was when the Venetians made an important discovery. More money could be made buying and selling salt than producing it. Beginning in 1281, the government paid merchants a subsidy on salt landed in Venice from other areas. As a result of this assistance, shipping salt to Venice became so profitable that the salt merchants could afford to ship other goods at prices that undersold their competitors. Growing fat on the salt subsidy, Venice merchants could afford to send ships to the eastern Mediterranean, where they picked up valuable cargoes of Indian spices and sold them in western Europe at low prices that their non-Venetian competitors could not afford to offer. That meant that Venetians were paying extremely high prices for salt, but they did not mind expensive salt if they could dominate the spice trade and be leaders in the grain trade. When grain harvests failed in Italy, Venice would use its salt income to subsidize grain imports from other parts of the Mediterranean and thereby corner the Italian grain market.
Unlike the Chinese salt monopoly, the Venetian government never owned salt but simply took a profit from regulating its trade. Enriched by its share of sales on high- priced salt, the salt administration could offer loans to finance other trade. Between the fourteenth and sixteenth centuries, a period when Venice was a leading port for grains and spices, 30 to 50 percent of the tonnage of imports to Venice was in salt. All salt had to go through government agencies. The salt administration issued licenses that told merchants not only how much salt they could export but also to where and at what price. The salt administration also maintained Venices palatial public buildings and the complex hydraulic system that prevented the metropolis from washing away. Many of Venices grand statues and ornamental buildings were financed by the salt administration.
Venice carefully built its reputation as a reliable supplier, and so contracts with the merchant state were desirable. Venice was able to dictate terms for these contracts. In 1250, when Venice agreed to supply Mantua and Ferrara with salt, the contract stipulated that these cities would not buy salt from anyone else.  This became the model for Venetian salt contracts.  As Venice became the salt supplier to more and more countries, it needed more and more salt producers from which to buy. Merchants financed by the salt administration went farther into the Mediterranean, buying salt from many distant sources.  Wherever they went, they tried to dominate the supply, control the saltworks, and even acquire them if they could. 
Venice manipulated markets by controlling production. In the late thirteenth century, wishing to raise the world market price, Venice had all saltworks on the Greek island of Crete destroyed, and it banned the local production of salt. The Venetians then brought in all the salt needed for local consumption, built stores to sell the imported salt, and paid damages to the owners of the saltworks. The policy was designed to control prices and at the same time keep the locals happy. Aiding its ability to ruthlessly manipulate commerce and control territory, Venice maintained the ships of the merchant fleet as a naval reserve and called them into combat when needed. The Venetian fleet patrolled the Adriatic Sea, stopped ships, inspected cargo, and demanded licensing documents to make sure all commercial traffic was conforming with its regulations.
 
Select the TWO answer choices that give the two reasons provided in paragraph 1 for Venices need to import salt from other places. To receive credit, you must select TWO answers.
The fine-grained salt produced at the Chioggia saltworks was too expensive for Venetians to purchase.
Imports provided Venetians with a kind of salt unavailable from the local salt production site.
Venice needed to purchase additional supplies of salt because natural disasters had destroyed part of its salt production site.
When Cervia was no longer a competitor, Venetian salt was used mostly for export, leaving little salt available for local use.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Non-Venetian merchants preferred to trade in Indian spices rather than salt because they did not have the salt subsidy that merchants from Venice had.
The salt subsidy enabled Venetian merchants to sell Indian spices in western Europe at cheaper prices than their competitors could.
The expense of shipping heavy salt cargoes to western Europe convinced merchants from Venice to sell expensive Indian spices instead.
By sending ships to the eastern Mediterranean and western Europe, merchants from many nations were able to offer both salt and spices at profitable prices.
According to paragraph 2, Venetians were willing to pay extremely high prices for their salt because they understood that
salt was still cheaper in Venice than it was in other places
the government would provide them with all of their other needs
the salt trade enabled them to control trade of other profitable products
the profits from salt could be used to develop the agricultural economy of Italy
Which of the following statements about Chinese salt can be inferred from paragraph 3?
The Chinese government owned all of the salt in China and controlled its trade.
The Chinese government was in direct competition with Venice for control of the salt trade.
Venice bought a great deal of salt from Chinese merchants, whose salt was of better quality.
The governments of China and Venice cooperated with each other so that both could make a profit on the salt trade.
The word stipulatedin the passage is closest in meaning to
assumed
required
revealed
suggested
According to paragraph 3, the salt administration was responsible for all of the following EXCEPT
permitting merchants to set the price for exported salt
granting licenses to salt merchants
ensuring proper functioning of the citys hydraulics
maintaining public buildings
The word ruthlesslyin the passage is closest in meaning to
without pressure
without mercy
without effort
without expense
In paragraph 5, why does the author include information about Venices merchant ships?
To explain how Venice succeeded in destroying the saltworks on Crete
To provide a reason for the high prices of Venetian salt
To identify a measure Venice took to control the salt trade
To argue that Venices policies made it unpopular in the rest of the world

Play is easier to define with examples than with concepts. In any case, in animals it consists of leaping, running, climbing, throwing, wrestling, and other movements, either along, with objects, or with other animals. Depending on the species, play may be primarily for social interaction, exercise, or exploration. One of the problems in providing a clear definition of play is that it involves the same behaviors that take place in other circumstance--dominance, predation, competition, and real fighting. Thus, whether play occurs or not depends on the intention of the animals, and the intentions are not always clear from behaviors alone.
Play appears to be a developmental characteristic of animals with fairly sophisticated nervous systems, mainly birds and mammals. Play has been studied most extensively in primates and canids (dogs). Exactly why animals play is still a matter debated in the research literature, and the reasons may not be the same for every species that plays. Determining the functions of play is difficult because the functions may be long-term, with beneficial effects not showing up until the animal's adulthood.
Play is not without considerable costs to the individual animal. Play is usually very active, involving movement in space and, at times, noisemaking. Therefore, it results in the loss of fuel or energy that might better be used for growth or for building up fat stores in a young animal. Another potential cost of this activity is greater exposure to predators since play is attention-getting behavior. Great activities also increase the risk of injury in slipping or falling.
The benefits of play must outweigh costs, or play would not have evolved, according to Darwin' s theory. Some of the potential benefits relate directly to the healthy development of the brain and nervous system. In one research study, two groups of young rats were raised under different conditions. One group developed in an "enriched" environment, which allowed the rats to interact with other rats, play with toys, and receive maze training. The other group lived in an "impoverished" environment in individual cages in a dimly lit room with little stimulation. At the end of the experiments, the results showed that the actual weight of the brains of the impoverished rats was less than that of those raised in the enriched environment (though they were fed the same diets). Other studies have shown that greater stimulation not only affects the size of the brain but also increase the number of connections between the nerve cells. Thus, active play may provide necessary stimulation to the growth of synaptic connections in the brain, especially the cerebellum, which is responsible for motor functioning and movements.
Play also stimulates the development of the muscle tissues themselves and may provide the opportunities to practice those movements needed for survival. Prey species, like young deer or goats, for example, typically play by performing sudden flight movements and turns, whereas predator species, such as cats, practice stalking, pouncing, and biting.
Play allows a young animal to explore its environment and practice skill in comparative safety since the surrounding adults generally do not expect the young to deal with threats or predators. Play can also provide practice in social behaviors needed for courtship and mating. Learning appropriate social behaviors is especially important for species that live in groups, like young monkeys that needed to learn to control selfishness and aggression and to understand the give-and-take involved in social groups. They need to learn how to be dominant and submissive because each monkey might have to play either role in the future. Most of these things are learned in the long developmental periods that primates have, during which they engage in countless play experiences with their peers.
There is a danger, of course, that play may be misinterpreted or not recognized as play by others, potentially leading to aggression.
 This is especially true when play consists of practicing normal aggressive or predator behaviors.  Thus, many species have evolved clear signals to delineate playfulness. 
 Dogs, for example, will wag their tails, get down their front legs, and stick their behinds in the air to indicate "what follows is just for play." 
 
According to paragraph 1, why is play difficult to define
Play must be defined with concepts, not examples.
Play behavior often looks like nonplay behavior
Play often occurs in the presence of animals that are not playing
Play occurs independently of an animals intentions
According to paragraph 2, which of the following presents a particular challenge to researchers who study play behavior in animals
The delay between activities and the benefits the animal derives from them.
The difficulty in determining which animal species play and which do not.
The fact that for most animals, there is no clear transition from youth to full adulthood.
The lack of research on the play behavior of animals other than canids and primates.
The word considerablein the passage is closest in the meaning to
Initial
Practical
Eventually
Significant
According to paragraph 3, each of the following is a cost to animals that engage in play EXCEP
exposure to predators
a buildup of fat stores
a loss of fuel that could be used for growth
risk of injury from slipping or falling
Why does the author include the comment though they were fed the same diets
To show why rats living in impoverished environments need less food than those living in enriched environments
To eliminate the possibility that differences in diet were responsibly for observed differences in brain weight
To emphasize the point that rats were fed only the amount of food needed to keep them alive
To suggest that rats fed the same diet have smaller brains than those fed a varied food
Paragraph 4 supports which of the following statements about an animals brain.
The heavier the brain, the richer the environment in which the animal was raised.
The younger the animal, the harder it is to develop new connections between nerve cells.
The larger the animal, the harder it is to develop new connections between nerve cells.
The larger the animals cerebellum, the larger will be the animals nerve cells.
According to paragraph 5, why might play behavior of prey species be different from those of predator species
Unlike predator species, prey species use play to prevent inappropriate social behaviors, such as biting.
Some prey species are physically incapable of certain types of predator movements.
The survival of each species type is linked to particular sets of muscular movements.
Predator species have more opportunities to practice play behaviors than prey species.
The word comparativein the passage is closest in meaning t
relative
temporary
sufficient
complete
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Only monkeys that have learned to control their selfish and aggressive behaviors can be involved in social groups.
Selfish and aggressive animals like monkeys live in groups in order to practice appropriate social behaviors.
Monkeys and other social animals need to learn behaviors appropriate for their social groups.
Some monkeys are naturally too selfish and aggressive to understand the give-and-take of social groups, so they learn such important behaviors while young.
What can be inferred from paragraph 6 about the role of adults in play activities of the young?
Adults help their young learn to become dominant within the social group.
Young animals learn how to play from the adults within their social group.
Adults allow the young to engage in play behaviors within a protected, safe environment.
The long developmental period of some animals allows adults more time to teach their young how to deal with the threats of predators.
The word potentiallyin the passage is closest in meaning to
undoubtedly
possibly
unfortunately
quickly
According to paragraph 7, how do some animals ensure that other animals understand that they are just playing?
By playing only with animals who are not predator
By avoiding any aspects of the play behavior that are dangerous
By practicing nonaggressive and non-predatory behaviors
By using a set of signals that occurs only in play

In Europe, before the introduction of the mechanical clock, people told time by sun (using, for example, shadow sticks or sun dials) and water clocks. Sun clocks worked, of course, only on clear days; water clocks misbehaved when the temperature fell toward freezing, to say nothing of long-run drift as the result of sedimentation and clogging. Both these devices worked well in sunny climates; but in northern Europe the sun may be hidden by clouds for weeks at a time, while temperatures vary not only seasonally but from day to night.
Medieval Europe gave new importance to reliable time. The Catholic Church had its seven daily prayers, one of which was at night, requiring an alarm arrangement to waken monks before dawn. And then the new cities and towns, squeezed by their walls, had to know and order time in order to organize collective activity and ration space. They set a time to go to sleep,to open the market ,to close the market ,to leave work ,and finally a time to put out fires and to go to sleep. All this was compatible with older devices so long as there was only one authoritative timekeeper; but with urban growth and the multiplication of time signals, discrepancy brought discord and strife. Society needed a more dependable instrument of time measurement and found it in the mechanical clock.
We do not know who invented this machine, or where. It seems to have appeared in Italy and England (perhaps simultaneous invention) between 1275 and 1300. Once known, it spread rapidly, driving out water clocks but not solar dials, which were needed to check the new machines against the timekeeper of last resort. These early versions were rudimentary, inaccurate, and prone to breakdown.
 
Ironically, the new machine tended to undermine Catholic Church authority. Although church ritual had sustained an interest in timekeeping throughout the centuries of urban collapse
 that followed the fall of Rome, church time was nature s time. Day and night were divided into the same number of parts, so that except at the equinoxes, days and night hours were unequal;
 and then of course the length of these hours varied with the seasons. But the mechanical clock kept equal hours, and this implied a new time reckoning. The Catholic Church resisted, 
 not coming over to the new hours for about a century. From the start, however, the towns and cities took equal hours as their standard, and the public clocks installed in town halls and market 
 squares became the very symbol of a new, secular municipal authority. Every town wanted one; conquerors seized them as especially precious spoils of war; tourists came to see and hear these 
 machines the way they made pilgrimages to sacred relics.

The clock was the greatest achievement of medieval mechanical ingenuity. Its general accuracy could be checked against easily observed phenomena, like the rising and setting of the sun. The result was relentless pressure to improve technique and design. At every stage, clockmakers led the way to accuracy and precision; they became masters of miniaturization, detectors and correctors of error, searchers for new and better. They were thus the pioneers of mechanical engineering and served as examples and teachers to other branches of engineering.
The clock brought order and control, both collective and personal. Its public display and private possession laid the basis for temporal autonomy: people could now coordinate comings and goings without dictation from above. The clock provided the punctuation marks for group activity, while enabling individuals to order their own work (and that of others) so as to enhance productivity. Indeed, the very notion of productivity is a by-product of the clock: once one can relate performance to uniform time units, work is never the same. One moves from the task-oriented time consciousness of the peasant (working on job after another, as time and light permit) and the time-filling busyness of the domestic servant (who always had something to do) to an effort to maximize product per unit of time.
 
Why does the author provide the information that in northern Europe the sun may be hidden by clouds for weeks at a time, while temperatures vary not only seasonally but from day to night
To emphasize the variety of environments in which people used sun and water clocks to tell time
To illustrate the disadvantage of sun and water clocks
To provide an example of an area where water clocks have an advantage over sun clocks
To counter the claim that sun and water clocks were used all over Europe
According to paragraph 2, all of the following are examples of the importance of timekeeping to medieval European society EXCEP
the need of different towns to coordinate timekeeping with each other
the setting of specific times for the opening and closing of markets
the setting of specific time for the start and finish of the working day
the regulation of the performance of daily church rituals
According to paragraph 2, why did the medieval church need an alarm arrangement?
The alarm warned the monks of discord or strife in the town.
The church was responsible for regulating working hours and market hours.
The alarm was needed in case fires were not put out each night.
One of the churchs daily rituals occurred during the night.
The word authoritativein the passage is closest in meaning to
actual
important
official
effective
The author uses the phrase the timekeeper of last resortto refer t
water clocks
the sun
mechanical clocks
the church
The word rudimentaryin the passage is closest in meaning t
rare
small
impractical
basic
According to paragraph 4, how did the Catholic Church react to the introduction of mechanical clocks
It used mechanical clocks through the period of urban collapse
It used clocks to better understand natural phenomena, like equinoxes
It tried to preserve its own method of keeping time, which was different from mechanical-clock time.
It used mechanical clocks to challenge secular, town authorities.
The word installedin the passage is closest in meaning to
required
expected by the majority of people
standardized
put in place
It can be inferred from paragraph 5 that medieval clockmaker
were able to continually make improvements in the accuracy of mechanical clocks
were sometimes not well respected by other engineers
sometimes made claims about the accuracy of mechanical clocks that were not true
rarely shared their expertise with other engineers
Paragraph 5 answers which of the following questions about mechanical clocks.
How did early mechanical clocks work?
Why did the design of mechanical clocks affect engineering in general?
How were mechanical clocks made?
What influenced the design of the first mechanical clock?
The word pioneersin the passage is closest in meaning to
leaders
opponents
employers
guardians
According to paragraph 6, how did the mechanical clock affect labor
It encouraged workers to do more time-filling busywork.
It enabled workers to be more task oriented.
It pushed workers to work more hours every day.
It led to a focus on productivity.

The pottery of ancient Romans is remarkable in several ways. The high quality of Roman pottery is very easy to appreciate when handling actual pieces of tableware or indeed kitchenware and amphorae (the large jars used throughout the Mediterranean for the transport and storage of liquids, such as wine and oil). However, it is impossible to do justice to Roman wares on the page, even when words can be backed up by photographs and drawing. Most Roman pottery is light and smooth to touch and very tough, although, like all pottery, it shatters if dropped on a hard surface. It is generally made with carefully selected and purified clay, worked to thin-walled and standardized shapes on a fast wheel and fired in a kiln (pottery oven) capable of ensuring a consistent finish. With handmade pottery, inevitably there are slight differences between individual vessels of the same design and occasional minor blemishes (flaws). But what strikes the eye and the touch most immediately and most powerfully with Roman pottery is its consistent high quality.
This is not just an aesthetic consideration but also a practical one. These vessels are solid (brittle, but not fragile), they are pleasant and easy to handle (being light and smooth), and, with their hard and sometimes glossy (smooth and shiny) surfaces, they hold liquids well and are easy to wash. Furthermore, their regular and standardized shapes would have made them simple to stack and store. When people today are shown a very ordinary Roman pot and, in particular, are allowed to handle it, they often comment on how modern it looks and feels, and they need to be convinced of its true age.
As impressive as the quality of Roman pottery is its sheer massive quantity. When considering quantities, we would ideally like to have some estimates for overall production from particular sites of pottery manufacture and for overall consumption at specific settlements. Unfortunately, it is in the nature of the archaeological evidence, which is almost invariable only a sample of what once existed, that such figures will always be elusive. However, no one who has ever worked in the field would question the abundance of Roman pottery, particularly in the Mediterranean region. This abundance is notable in Roman settlements (especially urban sites) where the labor that archaeologists have to put into the washing and sorting of potsherds (fragments of pottery) constitutes a high proportion of the total work during the initial phases of excavation.
 
 Only rarely can we derive any real quantities from deposits of broken pots.  However, there is one exceptional dump, which does represent a very large part of the sites total history of
consumption and for which an estimate of quantity has been produced.  On the left bank of the Tiber River in Rome, by one of the river ports of the ancient city, is a substantial hill some 50
meters high called Monte Testaccio. It is made up entirely of broken oil amphorae, mainly of the second and third centuries A.D. It has been estimated that Monte Testaccio contains the remains of 
some 53 million amphorae, in which around 6,000million liters of oil were imported into the city from overseas, imports into imperial Rome were supported by the full might of the state and were 
therefore quite exceptional----but the size of the operations at Monte Testaccio, and the productivity and complexity that lay behind them, nonetheless cannot fail to impress. This was a society 
with similarities to modern one----moving goods on a gigantic scale, manufacturing high-quality containers to do so, and occasionally, as here, even discarding them on delivery.

Roman pottery was transported not only in large quantities but also over substantial distances. Many Roman pots, in particular amphorae and the fine wares designed for use at tables, could travel hundreds of miles----all over the Mediterranean and also further afield. But maps that show the various spots where Roman pottery of a particular type has been found tell only part of the story. What is more significant than any geographical spread is the access that different levels of society had to good-quality products. In all but the remotest regions of the empire, Roman pottery of a high standard is common at the sites of humble villages and isolated farmsteads.
 
Paragraph 1 indicates which of the following about Roman pottery?
Roman amphorae were of much higher quality overall than other Roman pottery.
Roman pottery can best be appreciated when actual pieces are handled.
Roman pottery declined slightly in quality when the use of fast wheels and kilns was introduced.
Roman practical tableware spread more rapidly across the Mediterranean than amphorae did.
All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 1 as characteristics of Roman pottery EXCEPT
It was usually made with high-quality clay.
It generally did not weigh much.
It did not break as easily as other ancient pottery.
It sometimes had imperfections.
According to paragraph 2, which of the following is NOT true of Roman vessels
They were good containers for liquids.
Their shapes allowed for easy stacking and storing.
They sometimes had shiny surfaces.
Their true age is immediately apparent.
The author mentions the work of archaeologists in paragraph 3 in order t
support the idea that pottery was produced in large quantities by the Romans
illustrate how hard it is for archaeologists to find complete pieces of Roman pottery
contrast archaeological sites in Roman urban areas with other sites in the Mediterranean
explain why the quantities of pottery found vary significantly from one site to another
The word substantialin the passage is closest in meaning t
protected
man-made
large
famous
According to paragraph 4, Monte Testaccio is particularly important for archaeologists because archaeologists were able to
conclude how amphorae manufacturing increased rapidly after the second century A.D.
find the locations where most of the amphorae in the Roman Empire were produced
obtain relatively accurate calculations of the quantities of amphorae used over time in that place
discover that the Roman state had supported amphorae production
The word entirelyin the passage is closest in meaning to
apparently
completely
basically
mostly
Paragraph 4 indicates which of the following about the port on the Tiber River near Monte Testaccio
It was built around the third century A.D.
It was close to areas where large quantities of oil were produced.
It was in use only for a very short period of time.
It had impressive level of commercial activity.
The statement in paragraph 4 that amphorae delivered to the port near Monte Testaccio were occasionally discarded support which of the following
Traders at the port were often careless.
The quality of the amphorae used at the port was not very good.
The scale of the trade made it possible to waste quality amphorae sometimes.
The importing of oil from overseas gradually declined, reducing the need for pottery containers.
The statement that maps that show the various spots where Roman pottery of a particular type has been found tell only part of the storymakes the point that
maps indicate where specific pottery styles have been found, but they do not indicate where these styles originated
maps show the geographical spread of Roman pottery but not the people who had access to it
maps do not usually include pottery styles found in the remotest regions the Roman Empire
archaeologist studying Roman pottery need to use a range of techniques in their investigations
The word humblein the passage is closest in meaning to
rural
distant
ancient
modest
The word particularin the passage is closest in meaning t
specific
common
ancient
superior

When several individuals of the same species or of several different species depend on the same limited resource, a situation may arise that is referred to as competition. The existence of competition has been long known to naturalists; its effects were described by Darwin in considerable detail. Competition among individuals of the same species (intraspecies competition), one of the major mechanisms of natural selection, is the concern of evolutionary biology. Competition among the individuals of different species (interspecies competition) is a major concern of ecology. It is one of the factors controlling the size of competing populations, and extreme cases it may lead to the extinction of one of the competing species. This was described by Darwin for indigenous New Zealand species of animals and plants, which died out when competing species from Europe were introduced.
No serious competition exists when the major needed resource is in superabundant supply, as in most cases of the coexistence of herbivores (plant eaters). Furthermore, most species do not depend entirely on a single resource, if the major resource for a species becomes scarce, the species can usually shift to alternative resources. If more than one species is competing for a scarce resource, the competing species usually switch to different alternative resources. Competition is usually most severe among close relatives with similar demands on the environment. But it may also occur among totally unrelated forms that compete for the same resource, such as seed-eating rodents and ants. The effects of such competition are graphically demonstrated when all the animals or all the plants in an ecosystem come into competition, as happened 2 million years ago at the end of Pliocene, when North and South America became joined by the Isthmus of Panama. North and South American species migrating across the Isthmus now came into competition with each other. The result was the extermination of a large fraction of the South American mammals, which were apparently unable to withstand the competition from invading North American species----although added predation was also an important factor.
To what extent competition determines the composition of a community and the density of particular species has been the source of considerable controversy. The problem is that competition ordinarily cannot be observed directly but must be inferred from the spread or increase of one species and the concurrent reduction or disappearance of another species. The Russian biologist G. F. Gause performed numerous two-species experiments in the laboratory, in which one of the species became extinct when only a single kind of resource was available. On the basis of these experiments and of field observations, the so-called law of competitive exclusion was formulated, according to which no two species can occupy the same niche. Numerous seeming exceptions to this law have since been found, but they can usually be explained as cases in which the two species, even though competing for a major joint resource, did not really occupy exactly the same niche.
Competition among species is of considerable evolutionary importance. The physical structure of species competing for resources in the same ecological niche tends to gradually evolve in ways that allow them to occupy different niches. Competing species also tend to change their ranges so that their territories no longer overlap. The evolutionary effect of competition on species has been referred to as species selection; however, this description is potentially misleading. Only the individuals of a species are subject to the pressures of natural selection. The effect on the well-being and existence of a species is just the result of the effects of selection on all the individuals of the species. Thus species selection is actually a result of individual selection.
 
Competition may occur for any needed resource.  In the case of animals it is usually food; in the case of forest plants it may be light; in the case of substrate inhabitants it may be space,
as in many shallow-water bottom-dwelling marine organisms.  Indeed, it may be for any of the factors, physical as well as biotic, that are essential for organisms. 
Competition is usually the more severe the denser the population.  Together with predation, it is the most important density-dependent factor in regulating population growth.

 
The phrase mechanisms of natural selectionin the passage is closest in meaning t
types of natural selection
dangers of natural selection
problems natural selection solves
ways natural selection works
According to paragraph 1, what is one effect of competition among individuals of different species
It results in the eventual elimination of the resource for which they are competing.
It leads to competition among individuals of the same species.
It encourages new species to immigrate to an area.
It controls the number of individuals in the competing populations.
The word indigenousin the passage is closest in meaning to
native
rate
most
numerous
In paragraph 1, why does the author mention what happened in New Zealand
To indicate that Darwin understood the importance of competition
To illustrate that competition can lead to the extinction of species
To identify where the idea of competition among species first arose
To argue against the idea that the process of selection is a natural occurrence
According to paragraph 2, competition is not usually a significant factor among two coexisting species whe
one of the species has only recently moved into the territory of the other
the species are closely related to each other
the population of one species is much larger than that of the other
both of the species are herbivores
The word graphicallyin the passage is closest in meaning to
vividly
frequently
broadly
typically
In paragraph 2, why does the author talk about what happened as a result of North and South America becoming joined at the Isthmus of Panama?
To make the point that predation can have as much effect on species survival as competition does
To show how the ability to switch to an alternative resource can give a species a competitive advantage
To account for the current species composition of North and South America
To provide an example of the serious effects of competition between unrelated species
Paragraph 3 supports the idea that Gauses experiments were important because the
provided a situation in which competition could be removed from the interaction between two species
showed that previous ideas about the extent to which competition determines the composition of a community were completely mistaken
helped establish that competition will remove all but one species from any given ecological niche
offered evidence that competition between species is minimal when there is an overabundance of a single food source
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information
Apparent exceptions to this law usually involves cases in which two species compete for the same major resource but occupy slightly different niches.
Although it may appear that two species always have different niches, many exceptions show that species compete with each other.
Cases in which two species not only compete for a shared resource but also occupy similar niches are considered exceptions to this law.
Cases in which the two species do not occupy that same niche yet still compete for the same resource are believed to be exceptions to this law.
According to paragraph 4, how does competition affect evolution?
It results in the evolution of physical structures that allow the species to compete with each other more effectively.
It results in the evolutionary extinction of all but one of the competing species.
It results in the competing species evolving in such a way that they no longer compete for the same resources.
It results in the competing species evolving to become so much like each other that competition between them eventually disappears.
According to paragraph 4, species selectionis a misleading term because i
overemphasizes the role of selection pressure in species extinction
suggests that selection pressures directly influence whole species
does not make a distinction between species extinction and species evolution
suggests that extinction always results whenever there is a competition
The word regulatingin the passage is closest in meaning to
controlling
explaining
observing
stopping

Moving water was one of the earliest energy sources to be harnessed to reduce the workload of people and animals. No one knows exactly when the waterwheel was invented, but irrigation systems existed at least 5,000 years ago, and it seems probable that the earliest waterpower device was the noria, a waterwheel that raised water for irrigation in attached jars. The device appears to have evolved no later than the fifth century B.C., perhaps independently in different regions of the Middle and Far East.
The earliest waterpower mills were probably vertical-axis mills for grinding corn, known as Norse or Greek mills, which seem to have appeared during the first or second century B.C. in the Middle East and a few centuries later in Scandinavia. In the following centuries, increasingly sophisticated waterpower mills were built throughout the Roman Empire and beyond its boundaries in the Middle East and northern Europe. In England, the Saxons are thought to have used both horizontal and vertical-axis wheels. The first documented English mill was in the eighth century, but three centuries later about 5,000 were recorded, suggesting that every settlement of any size had its mill.
Raising water and grinding corn were by no means the only uses of the waterpower mill, and during the following centuries, the application of waterpower kept pace with the developing technologies of mining, iron working, paper making, and the wool and cotton industries. Water was the main source of mechanical power, and by the end of the seventeenth century, England alone is thought to have had some 20,000 working mill. There was much debate on the relative efficiencies of different types of waterwheels.  The period from about 1650 until 1800 saw some excellent scientific and technical investigations of different designs. They revealed output powers ranging from about 1 horsepower to perhaps 60 for the largest wheels and confirmed that for maximum efficiency, the water should pass across the blades as smoothly as possible and fall away with minimum speed, having given up almost all of its kinetic energy.  (They also proved that, in principle, the overshot wheel, a type of wheel in which an overhead stream of water powers the wheel, should win the efficiency competition.) 
But then steam power entered the scene, putting the whole future of waterpower in doubt. An energy analyst writing in the year 1800 would have painted a very pessimistic picture of the future for waterpower. The coal-fired steam engine was taking over, and the waterwheel was fast becoming obsolete. However, like many later experts, this one would have suffered from an inability to see into the future. A century later the picture was completely different: by then, the world had an electric industry, and a quarter of its generating capacity was water powered.
The growth of the electric-power industry was the result of a remarkable series of scientific discoveries and development in electrotechnology during the nineteenth century, but significant changes in what we might now call hydro (water) technology also played their part. In 1832, the year of Michael Faradays discovery that a changing magnetic field produces an electric field, a young French engineer patented a new and more efficient waterwheel. His name was Benoit Fourneyron, and his device was the first successful water turbine. The waterwheel, unaltered for nearly 2,000 years, had finally been superseded.
Half a century of development was needed before Faradays discoveries in electricity were translated into full-scale power stations. In 1881 the Godalming power station in Surrey, England, on the banks of the Wey River, created the worlds first public electricity supply. The power source of this most modern technology was a traditional waterwheel. Unfortunately this early plant experienced the problem common to many forms of renewable energy: the flow in the Wey River was unreliable, and the waterwheel was soon replaced by a steam engine.
From this primitive start, the electric industry grew during the final 20 years of the nineteenth century at a rate seldom if ever exceeded by any technology. The capacity of individual power stations, many of them hydro plants, rose from a few kilowatts to over a megawatt in less than a decade.
 
The word harnessed in the passage is closest in meaning to
known
depended on
recognized
utilized
In paragraph 1, uncertainty is expressed about all of the following aspects of the early development of waterpower EXCEPT
when exactly the very first waterpower devices were invented
when exactly the very first waterpower devices were developed
whether water was one of the earliest sources of power to be used by humans
whether the very earliest waterpower devices arose independently
According to paragraph 2, what was true of the waterpower mills built throughout the Roman Empire?
Most had horizontal-axis wheels
Their design was based on mills that had long been used in Scandinavia
Their design was more popular beyond the Empires boundaries than it was within the Empire.
They are more advanced than the mills used in the Middle East at an earlier time.
The phrase "the application of waterpower" in the passage is closest in meaning t
the uses to which waterpower was put
the improvement made to waterpower
the method by which waterpower was supplied
the source of waterpower available
According to paragraph 3, which of the following was discovered as a result of scientific and technical investigations of waterpower conducted between 1650 and 1800?
Some types of small waterwheel can produce as much horsepower as the very largest wheels.
Waterwheels operate more efficiently when water falls away from their blades slowly than when water falls away quickly.
Waterwheel efficiency can be improved by increasing the amount of kinetic energy water contains as it passes over a waterwheels blades.
Unlike other types of waterwheels, the overshot wheel is capable of producing more than 60 horsepower units of energy.
The word pessimistic in the passage is closest in meaning to
negative
unlikely
surprising
incomplete
The term by then in the passage refers to
by the time steam power entered the scene
by the year 1800
by the year 1900
by the time waterwheel was becoming obsolete
According to paragraph 4, why did waterpower become more importantly by 1900?
Better waterwheel designs improved the efficiency of waterpower.
Waterpower was needed to operate steam engines.
Waterpower was used to generate electricity.
Waterwheels became more efficient than coal-powered engines.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
The growth of the electric-power industry stimulated significant changes in hydro technology and scientific progress in electrotechnology in the nineteenth century.
The changes in hydro technology that led to the growth of the electric-power industry also led to discoveries and developments in electrotechnology in the nineteenth century.
Advances in electrotechnology in the nineteenth century and changes in hydro technology were responsible for the growth of the electric-power industry.
In the nineteenth century, the scientific study of electrotechnology and hydro technology benefited greatly from the growth of the electric-power industry.
The word unaltered in the passage is closest in meaning to
unimproved
unequaled
unchanged
unsatisfactory
The discussion of the history of electric power production in paragraph 5 supports which of the following?
1832 marked the beginning of the industrial production of electric power.
Turbines using Benoit Fourneyrons design were eventually used to generate electric power.
Benoit Fourneyron quickly applied Michael Faradays discovery about electric fields to acquire a patent for a new and more efficient waterwheel.
Practical advances in hydro technology were more important to the development of electric power than were advances in the theoretical understanding of electricity.
According to paragraph 6, what problem did the early power station in the town of Godalming in Surrey, United Kingdom, face in providing electricity?
The traditional waterwheel is used was not large enough to meet the demand for energy.
The flow of the River Wey, on which the power station depended, was unreliable.
The operators of the Godalming power station had little experience with hydro technology.
The steam engine that turned the waterwheel was faulty and needed to be replaced.

Most of the worlds potable water----freshwater suitable for drinking----is accounted for by groundwater, which is stored in the pores and fractures in rocks. There is more than 50 times as much freshwater stored underground than in all the freshwater rivers and lakes at the surface. Nearly 50 percent of all groundwater is stored in the upper 1,000 meters of Earth. At greater depths within Earth, the pressure of the overlying rock causes pores and cracks to close, reducing the space that pore water can occupy, and almost complete closure occurs at a depth of about 10 kilometers. The greatest water storage, therefore, lies near the surface.
Aquifers, Porosity and Permeability.Groundwater is stored in a variety of rock types. A groundwater reservoir from which water can be extracted is called an aquifer. We can effectively think of an aquifer as a deposit of water. Extraction of water depends on two properties of the aquifer: porosity and permeability. Between sediment grains are spaces that can be filled with water. This pore space is known as porosity and is expressed as a percentage of the total rock volume. Porosity is important for water-storage capacity, but for water to flow through rocks, the pore spaces must be connected. The ability of water, or other fluids, to flow through the interconnected pore spaces in rocks is termed permeability. In the intergranular spaces of rocks, however, fluid must flow around and between grains in a tortuous path; this winding path causes a resistance to flow. The rate at which the flowing water overcomes this resistance is related to the permeability of rock.
Sediment sorting and compaction influence permeability and porosity. The more poorly sorted or the more tightly compacted a sediment is ,the lower its porosity and permeability. Sedimentary rocks----the most common rock type near the surface----are also the most common reservoirs for water because they contain the most space that can be filled with water. Sandstones generally make good aquifers, while finer-grained mudstones are typically impermeable. Impermeable rocks are referred to as aquicludes. Igneous and metamorphic rocks are more compact, commonly crystalline, and rarely contain spaces between grains. However, even igneous and metamorphic rocks may act as groundwater reservoirs if extensive fracturing occurs in such rocks and if the fracture system is interconnected.
The water table is the underground boundary below which all the cracks and pores are filled with water. In some cases, the water table reaches Earths surface, where it is expressed as rivers, lakes and marshes.   Typically, though, the water table may be tens or hundreds of meters below the surface.   The water table is not flat but usually follows the contours of the topography.   Above the water table is the vadose zone, through which rainwater percolates.   Water in the vadose zone drains down to the water table, leaving behind a thin coating of water on mineral grains. The vadose zone supplies plant roots near the surface with water.
Because the surface of the water table is not flat but instead rises and falls with topography, groundwater is affected by gravity in the same fashion as surface water. Groundwater flows downhill to topographic lows. If the water table intersect the land surface, groundwater will flow out onto the surface at springs, whether to be collected there or to subsequently flow farther along a drainage. Groundwater commonly collects in stream drainages but may remain entirely beneath the surface of dry stream-beds in arid regions. In particularly wet years, short stretches of an otherwise dry stream-bed may have flowing water because the water table rises to intersect the land surface.
 
In paragraph 1, why does the author mention the pressure of the overlying rock
To show how water can be forced deep under Earths surface
To show why groundwater is more plentiful than surface freshwater
To correct a commonly made error about the location of groundwater
To explain why most groundwater lies near Earths surface
According to paragraph 1, groundwater differs from the water in rivers and lakes in terms of it
portability
usefulness
abundance
cost
The word extractedin the passage is closest in meaning to
used
poured
removed
kept out
The word termedin the passage is closest in meaning t
considered
called
limited to
caused by
According to paragraph 2, what does porosity determine
The rate at which the aquifers water overcomes resistance to flow
The amount of water that the aquifer can hold
The likelihood that fractures and joints will occur in the aquifer
The depth underground at which the aquifer lies
According to paragraph 2, what is the relationship between permeability and porosity?
The more pores a rock has, the higher its porosity but the lower its permeability.
Rocks with many internal spaces that are not connected with each other will have high porosity but low permeability.
If water flows through a rock easily, it has high permeability but low porosity.
Rocks that have high permeability have high porosity and vice versa.
The word compactedin the passage is closest in meaning to
hard
compressed
heavy
deeply buried
According to paragraph 3, when can igneous rock serve as an aquifer?
When it has many connected fractures
When it lies next to metamorphic rock
When it lies relatively near the surface
When it is crystalline
The word coatingin the passage is closest in meaning to
stream
barrier
amount
layer
Paragraph 4 implies which of the following about the roots of plants
They prevent water from reaching the vadose zone.
They mark the boundary between the vadose zone and the water table
They do not typically get their water from the water table.
They help keep the water table from dropping farther.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage paragraph 5? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information
Groundwater only flows out of the ground if the water table intersects the land surface.
If the land surface and the water table intersect, groundwater can flow underground.
Groundwater may be drained if springs occur where the water table intersects the land surface.
Where the water table meets the land surface, groundwater flows out through surface springs.
Paragraph 5 implies which of the following about the level of the water
It may rise or fall from year to year, depending on annual rainfall.
It does not vary in arid regions.
It rarely intersects the land surface of most regions.
It is unrelated to the rate at which groundwater flows.

 
A conspicuous sign indicating the presence of white-tailed deer in a woodlot is a buck rub.  A male deer makes a buck rub by striping the bark (outer layer) of a small tree with its antlers.
 When completed, the buck rub is an obvious visual signal to us and presumable to other deer in the area. A rub is usually located at the shoulder height of a deer
(one meter or less above the ground) on a smooth-barked, small-diameter (16-25 millimeters) tree. The smooth bark of small red maples makes this species ideal for buck rubs in the forests of 
the mid-eastern United States.

Adult male deer usually produce rubs in late summer or early autumn when the outer velvet layer is being shed from their antlers. Rubs are created about one to two months before the breeding season (the rut). Hence for a long time biologists believed that male deer used buck rubs not only to clean and polish antlers but also to provide practice for the ensuing male-to-male combat during the rut. However, biologists also noted deer sniff and lick an unfamiliar rub, which suggests that this visual mark on a small tree plays an important communication purpose in the social life of deer.
Buck rubs also have a scent produced by glands in the foreheads of deer that is transferred to the tree when the rub is made. These odors make buck rubs an important means of olfactory communication between deer. The importance of olfactory communication (using odors to communicate) in the way of life of deer was documented by a study of captive adult male deer a few decades ago, which noted that males rubbed their foreheads on branches and twigs, especially as autumn approached. A decade later another study reported that adult male white-tailed deer exhibited forehead rubbing just before and during the rut. It was found that when a white-tailed buck makes a rub, it moves both antlers and forehead glands along the small tree in a vertical direction. This forehead rubbing behavior coincides with a high level of glandular activity in the modified scent glands found on the foreheads of male deer; the glandular activity causes the forehead pelage (hairy covering) of adult males to be distinctly darker than in females or younger males.
Forehead rubbing by male deer on buck rubs presumably sends a great deal of information to other members of the same species. First, the chemicals deposited on the rub provide information on the individual identity of an animal; no two mammals produce the same scent. For instance, as we all know, dogs recognize each other via smell. Second, because only male deer rub, the buck rub and its associated chemicals indicate the sex of the deer producing the rub. Third, older, more dominant bucks produce more buck rubs and probably deposit more glandular secretions on a given rub. Thus the presence of many well-marked rubs is indicative of older, higher-status males being in the general vicinity rather than simply being a crude measure of relative deer abundance in a given area. The information conveyed by the olfactory signals on a buck rub make it the social equivalent of some auditory signals in other deer species, such as trumpeting by bull elk.
Because both sexes of white-tailed respond to buck rubs by smelling and licking them, rubs may serve a very important additional function. Fresher buck rubs (less than two days old), in particular, are visited more frequently by adult females than older rubs. In view of this behavior it has been suggested that chemicals present in fresh buck rubs may help physiologically induce and synchronize fertility in females that visit these rubs. This would be an obvious advantage to wide-ranging deer, especially to a socially dominant buck when courting several adult females during the autumn rut. Another visual signal produced by while-tailed deer is termed a buck scrape. Scrapes consist of a clearing (about 0.5 meter in diameter) and shallow depression made by pushing aside the leaves covering the ground; after making the scrape, the deer typically urinates in the depression. Thus, like a buck rub, a scrape is both a visual and an olfactory signal. Buck scrapes are generally created after leaf-fall in autumn, which is just before or during the rut. Scrapes are usually placed in open or conspicuous places, such as along a deer trail. Most are made by older males, although females and younger males (2.5 years old or less) occasionally make scrapes.
 
The word conspicuousin the passage is closest in meaning to
noticeable
common
strange
particular
According to paragraph 1, why are small red maple trees ideal for buck rubs
They have smooth bark.
They are found in the mid-eastern United States.
They grow very slowly.
They tend to grow in open spaces.
The studies of forehead rubbing by deer described in paragraph 3 showed tha
forehead rubbing encourages the growth of antlers
male deer and white-tailed deer behave differently during the rut.
the rut can occur at different times of the year
deer convey important information through scent
The word exhibitedin the passage is closest in meaning t
relied on
increased
displayed
preferred
Why does the author mention that dogs recognize each other via smell?
To point out the similarities between dogs and deer
To argue that animals communicate through scent rather than through vision
To support the claim that the scent of a buck rub serves to identify its maker to other deer
To suggest that buck rubs can be detected by other species
The word crudein the passage is closest in meaning to
rough
useful
necessary
obvious
What can be inferred from paragraph 4 about the trumpeting of bull elk?
Trumpeting by higher-status bull elk signals their presence to other members of their species.
Bull elk need to combine trumpeting with olfactory signals to convey information about their identity.
Trumpeting alerts white-tailed deer to the presence of bull elk in their vicinity.
Trumpeting provides a better measure of deer presence in a given area than buck rubs do.
According to paragraph 4, the buck rubs occurring in a given area reveal all of the following information about deer EXCEPT
the individual identity of the deer
the gender of the deer
the likely social status of the deer
the number of deer in the vicinity
The word inducein the passage is closest in meaning to
increase
extend
delay
stimulate
According to paragraph 5, which of the following is true about chemicals in buck rubs?
They have to be at least two days old for females to be able to detect them.
They are more effective in older buck rubs than in fresher ones.
They may affect fertility in female deer.
They can be more easily detected by young males than adult females.
The word termedin the passage is closest in meaning t
associated with
visible as
known as
provided by
According to the passage, in what way do buck scrapes differ from buck rubs
Buck scrapes are made by both male and female deer.
Buck scrapes are purely visual signals.
Buck scrapes are made closer to the breeding season than buck rubs.
Buck scrapes can be smelled only by deer.

The Sahara is a highly diverse, albeit dry, region that has undergone major climatic changes since 10,000 B.C. As recently as 6,000 B.C. the southern frontier of the desert was far to the north of where it is now, while semiarid grassland and shallow freshwater lakes covered much of what are now arid plains. This was a landscape where antelope of all kinds abounded----along with Bos primigenius, a kind of oxen that has become extinct. The areas that are now desert were, like all arid regions, very susceptible to cycles of higher and lower levels of rainfall, resulting in major, sudden changes in distributions of plants and animals. The people who hunted the sparse desert animals responded to drought by managing the wild resources they hunted and gathered, especially wild oxen, which had to have regular water supplies to survive.
Even before the drought, the Sahara was never well watered. Both humans and animals were constantly on the move, in search of food and reliable water supplies. Under these circumstances, archaeologist Andrew Smith believes, the small herds of Bos primigenius in the desert became smaller, more closely knit breeding units as the drought took hold. The beasts were more disciplined, so that it was easier for hunters to predict their habits, and capture animals at will. At the same time, both cattle and humans were more confined in their movements, staying much closer to permanent water supplies for long periods of time. As a result, cattle and humans came into close association.
Smith believes that the hunters were well aware of the more disciplined ways in which their prey behaved. Instead of following the cattle on their annual migrations, the hunters began to prevent the herd from moving from one spot to another. At first, they controlled the movement of the herd while ensuring continuance of their meat diet.  But soon they also gained genetic control of the animals, which led to rapid physical changes in the herd. South African farmers who maintain herds of wild eland (large African antelopes with short, twisted horns) report that the offspring soon diminish in size, unless wild bulls are introduced constantly from outside. The same effects of inbreeding may have occurred in controlled cattle populations, with some additional, and perhaps unrecognized, advantages. The newly domesticated animals behaved better, were easier to control, and may have enjoyed a higher birth rate, which in turn yielded greater milk supplies. We know from rock paintings deep in the Sahara that the herders were soon selecting breeding animals to produce offspring with different horn shapes and hide colors.
It is still unclear whether domesticated cattle were tamed independently in northern Africa or introduced to the continent from southwest Asia. Whatever the source of the original tamed herds might have been, it seems entirely likely that much the same process of juxtaposition (living side by side) and control occurred in both southwest Asia and northern Africa, and even in Europe, among peoples who had an intimate knowledge of the behavior of wild cattle. The experiments with domestication probably occurred in many places, as people living in ever-drier environments cast around for more predictable food supplies.
The cattle herders had only a few possessions: unsophisticated pots and polished adzes. They also hunted with bow and arrow. The Saharan people left a remarkable record of their lives painted on the walls of caves deep in the desert. Their artistic endeavors have been preserved in paintings of wild animals, cattle, goats, humans, and scenes of daily life that extend back perhaps to 5,000 B.C.. The widespread distribution of pastoral sites of this period suggests that the Saharans ranged their herds over widely separated summer and winter grazing grounds.
About 3,500 B.C., climatic conditions again deteriorated. The Sahara slowly became drier and lakes vanished. On the other hand, rainfall increased in the interior of western Africa, and the northern limit of the tsetse fly, an insect fatal to cattle, moved south. So the herders shifted south, following the major river systems into savanna regions. By this time, the Saharan people were probably using domestic crops, experimenting with such summer rainfall crops as sorghum and millet as they move out of areas where they could grow wheat, barley, and other Mediterranean crops.
 
According to paragraph 1, what was true of the Sahara region around 6,000 B.C.?
Much less of it was desert than is now the case.
Most areas that are now grassland were covered by shallow lakes.
It had just undergone a major climatic change.
Wild oxen and antelopes lived in separate parts of the region.
The word albeit in the passage is closest in meaning to
usually
almost
though
rather
According to paragraph 1, which of the following is true of all arid regions
They include at least some freshwater lakes.
They have similar distributions of plants and animals.
They are greatly affected by changes in the amount of rain they receive.
They have frequent droughts that make it difficult to manage the wild resources.
Paragraph 2 supports which of the following ideas about wild oxen in the Sahara region after the drought took hold
They traveled in smaller herds.
They were harder for hunters to capture.
They tended to be significantly smaller in size.
They moved along less predictable routes.
According to paragraph 2, what was it that brought cattle and humans into close association
The development of smaller breeding units within hers.
Cattle and humans staying close to permanent water supplies for long period of time.
The development of greater discipline among cattle.
Cattle and humans constangly on the move searching for food and reliable water supplies.
Why does the author mention the rock paintings deep in the Sahara
To help explain why the hunters wanted to control the herds.
To provide support for the idea that the herders soon gained genetic control of the cattle
To show that the herders had artistic as well as practical abilities
To argue that the herders soon began to value their cattle for more than food.
According to paragraph 3, all of the following statements were true of newly domesticated animals EXCEPT
They were controlled more easily by the farmers.
They produced a larger number of offspring.
They produce more milk.
They were larger in size.
which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage paragraph 4? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Regardless of where the first tamed herds came from, people tried to control them by living in juxtaposition with them.
Regardless of where the first tamed herds came from, they resulted from the same process of juxtaposition and control by people who understood the behavior of wild cattle.
People who had an intimate knowledge of the behavior of wild cattle moved closer together to cooperate in taming the herd, regardless of where they found them.
The process of taming herds was certainly the same in southwest Asia, northern Africa, and Europe because people knew a lot about the behavior of wild cattle, regardless of where they lived.
According to paragraph 5, each of the following was true about the early Saharan people EXCEP
They had few possessions apart from cattle.
After about 5,000 , they lived primarily in caves that were located deep in the desert.
Between the summer and winter seasons, they moved their herds over long distances.
They painted animals and scenes of daily life on the walls of caves.
The word endeavors in the passage is closest in meaning to
methods
styles
scenes
efforts
The word deteriorated in the passage is closest in meaning t
became unstable
caused hardship
changed completely
got worse
According to paragraph 6, what allowed the herders to shift south into the savanna regions after about 3,500 B.C.
They could easily grow Mediterranean crops in those regions.
They could more easily domesticated sorghum and millet in those regions.
The tsetse fly was no longer a problem in those regions.
The river systems in those regions provided reliable sources of water in the summer.

Some of the earliest human civilizations arose in southern Mesopotamia, in what is now southern Iraq, in the fourth millennium B.C.E. In the second half of the millennium, in the south around the city of Uruk, there was an enormous escalation in the area occupied by permanent settlements. A large part of that increase took place in Uruk itself, which became a real urban center surrounded by a set of secondary settlements. While population estimates are notoriously unreliable, scholars assume that Uruk inhabitants were able to support themselves from the agricultural production of the field surrounding the city, which could be reached with a daily commute. But Uruks dominant size in the entire region, far surpassing that of other settlements, indicates that it was a regional center and a true city. Indeed, it was the first city in human history.
The vast majority of its population remained active in agriculture, even those people living within the city itself. But a small segment of the urban society started to specialize in nonagricultural tasks as a result of the citys role as a regional center. Within the productive sector, there was a growth of a variety of specialist craftspeople. Early in the Uruk period, the use of undecorated utilitarian pottery was probably the result of specialized mass production. In an early fourth-millennium level of the Eanna archaeological site at Uruk, a pottery style appears that is most characteristic of this process, the so-called beveled-rim bowl. It is a rather shallow bowl that was crudely made in a mold; hence, in only a limited number of standard sizes. For some unknown reason, many were discarded, often still intact, and thousands have been found all over the Near East. The beveled-rim bowl is one of the most telling diagnostic finds for identifying an Uruk-period site. Of importance is the fact that it was produced rapidly in large amounts, most likely by specialists in a central location.
A variety of documentation indicates that certain goods, once made by a family member as one of many duties, were later made by skilled artisans. Certain images depict groups of people, most likely women, involved in weaving textiles, an activity we know from later third-millennium texts to have been vital in the economy and to have been centrally administered. Also, a specialized metal-producing workshop may have been excavated in a small area at Uruk. It contained a number of channels lined by a sequence of holes, about 50 centimeters deep, all showing burn marks and filled with ashes. This has been interpreted as the remains of a workshop where molten metal was scooped up from the channel and poured into molds in the holes. Some type of mass production by specialists were involved here.
 
Objects themselves suggest that they were the work of skilled professionals. In the late Uruk period(3500-3100 B.C.E.), there first appeared a type of object that remained characteristic 
for Mesopotamia throughout its entire history: the cylinder seal. This was a small cylinder, usually no more than 3 centimeters high and 2 centimeters in diameter, of shell, bone, faience 
(a glassy type of stoneware), or various types of stones, on which a scene was carved into the surface. When rolled over a soft material----primarily the clay of bullae (round seals), tablets, 
or clay lumps attached to boxes, jars, or door bolts----the scene would appear in relief, easily legible. The technological knowledge needed to carved it was far superior to that for stamp seals, 
which had happened in the early Neolithic period (approximately 10,000-5000 B.C.E.). From the first appearance of cylinder seals, the carved scenes could be highly elaborate and refined, indicating 
the work of specialist stone-cutters. Similarly, the late Uruk period shows the first monumental art, relief, and statuary in the round, made with a degree of mastery that only a professional could 
have produced.

 
which of the sentences below best express the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Although scholars cannot accurately determine the size of the Uruk population, they know the citizens were not dependent on agriculture.
scholars do not have enough evidence to determine whether the agriculture areas just outside of Uruk were large enough to feed the citys population.
Because city populations cannot feed themselves, scholars think the surrounding farms provided food to the people in Uruk.
Scholars believe that the inhabitants of Uruk were able to support themselves from product grown in field surrounding the city.
The word surpassingin the passage is closest in meaning t
proceeding
exceeding
challenging
outlasting
According to paragraph 1, all of the following are true of the ancient settlement at Uruk EXCEPT:
It was a permanent settlement.
It was self-sufficient.
It was one of a group of other larger settlements.
It had easy access to the land where its crops were grown.
The word intactin the passage is closest in meaning to
unsold
unused
undamaged
unpainted
According to paragraph 2, which of the following best describes the beveled-rim bowls from the Eanna Archaeological site at Uruk.
They were discarded because they became unpopular.
They varied greatly in shape and decoration.
They were each individually styled.
They were made in only a few sizes.
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 2 about craft production in the Uruk period
Specialists in nonagricultural tasks obtained a higher status than those engaged in agricultural production.
People not needed for farming could perform other more specialized activities.
Ancient crafts were beginning to be produced for both utilitarian and decorative purposes.
Pottery making was the only known during the fourth millennium.
According to paragraph 3, which of the following is true of textile production after the fourth millennium
It had an important commercial value.
It existed but was not well organized.
It is not documented in the archaeological record.
It was carried on by individuals in their own homes.
The word interpretedin the passage (paragraph 3) is closest in meaning to
documented
debated
displayed
understood
What is the purpose of paragraph 3?
To contrast the productivity of crafts workers in the third and fourth millennia
To provide additional evidence of mass production by crafts workers
To suggest that an early form of urban settlement may have exist before Uruk
To contrast the development of weaving and pottery in Uruk
The word legiblein the passage is closest in meaning to
printable
enjoyable
recognizable
available
Paragraph 4 suggests which of the following about the significances of Mesopotamian cylinder seals
They were designed more for home than for legal use.
They demonstrate that their creators were professionals.
They were the first example of seals made from materials other than stone.
They were the first example of carved seals.
According to paragraph 4, one of the artistic achievements of the late Uruk culture was
Its sophisticated sculpture and relief carving
Its architecturally complex monuments
Its invention of stamp seals carved from stone
Its use of highly refined glassy stoneware

Volcanoes are the landforms created when molten rock, or magma, escapes from vents in the Earths surface and then solidifies around these vents. In any given year, roughly 50 of Earths active volcanoes erupt  usually with some warning. Before they blow, they typically shake, swell, warm up, and belch a variety of gases. Scientists from the Volcano Disaster Assistance Program (VDAP)part of the U.S. Geological Survey and based at the U.S. Geological Surveys Cascades Volcano Observatory in Vancouver, Washingtonare always on call, ready when summoned to rush at a moments notice to an awakening volcano anywhere in the world; armed with the latest in lasers, seismometers, and other monitoring devices, they can assess the volcanos potential for violence and predict when it might ignite.
Geologists have enjoyed fair success in predicting individual eruptive episodes when they concentrate on a specific volcano after an eruptive phase has begun. These monitoring efforts involve carefully measuring changes in a volcanos surface temperature, watching for the slightest expansion in its slope, and keeping track of regional earthquake activity. A laboratory at the University of Washington in Seattle is staffed 24 hours a day to monitor the rumblings of Mount St. Helens. Even with the advances brought by todays technology, however, the art of volcano prediction has not been fully mastered. The U.S. Geological Survey missed the call on Mount St. Helens 1980 blast despite the fact that the mountain was being watched closely by a large team of scientists armed with the latest in prediction technology. It did successfully predict the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines, evacuating virtually everyone within 25 kilometers (15 miles) before the volcanos powerful blast on May 17,1991.
Before a volcano erupts, hot magma rises toward the surface, so any local manifestation of increasing heat may signal an impending event. Ongoing surveys can identify new surface hot springs and take the temperature of the water and steam in existing ones. If the escaping steam isnt much hotter than the boiling point of water then surface water is probably seeping into the mountain and being heated by contact with hot subsurface rocks, and all is well for the time being. If the steam is superheated, with temperatures as high as 500 C (900 F), then it probably derives from shallow water-rich magma, a sign that an eruption may be brewing. As magma rises, the volcanic cone itself begins to heat up. The overall temperature of a volcanic cone can be monitored from an orbiting satellite equipped with infrared heat sensors to detect the slightest change in surface temperature. This high-altitude technology serves as a simultaneous early-warning system for most of Earths 600 or so active volcanoes. Impending eruptions may also be predicted by increased gas emissions from rising magmas. For this reason, volcanologists continuously monitor sulfur dioxide and carbon dioxide emissions from potentially active volcanoes.
Active volcanoes expand in volume as they acquire new supplies of magma from below.  As a result, an increase in the steepness or bulging of a volcanos slope may signal an impending eruption.  To detect the inflation of a volcanic cone, a tilt meter, a device like a carpenters level, is used.  As magma rises, it pushes aside fractured rock, enlarging the fractures as it moves. Because this type of fracturing causes earthquakes, eruptions are often preceded by a distinctive pattern of earthquake activity called harmonic tremors, a continuous rhythmic rumbling.  Sensitive equipment that monitors the location where these tremors occur can measure the increased height of rising magma. The rate at which the magma rises provides an estimate of when an eruption may occur. Indeed, it served as the principal means by which scientists accurately predicted recent eruptions of Mount St. Helens.
Efforts to predict eruptions are thwarted, however, when we are unaware of a sites volcanic potential. Occasionally, a new volcano appears suddenly and rather unexpectedly, as was the case in 1943, when the volcano Paricutin developed literally overnight in the Mexican state of Michoacan, 320 kilometers (200 miles) west of Mexico City. The surrounding area was known to be volcanic because of its geologic zone, but it was not possible to predict that the volcano would appear at this particular site. Our ability to predict volcanic eruptions continues to improve but is not yet as accurate as we need it to be.
 
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Scientists based at the U.S. Geological Surveys Cascade Volcanic Observatory in Vancouver, Washington are always being asked to rush somewhere to predict when a volcano is likely to awake and, if it erupts, what damage it could do.
Armed with the latest technology, U.S. Geological Survey scientists from the Volcano Disaster Assistance Program are always available to go anywhere in the world to assess whether, and when, an awakening volcano will erupt.
In order to learn how to predict when an awakening volcano will erupt, scientists from the Volcano Disaster Assistance Program take the latest lasers, seismometers, and other monitoring devices wherever there is an awakening volcano.
U.S. Geological Survey scientists from the Cascade Volcanic Observatory in Vancouver, Washington have the latest lasers, seismometers, and other monitoring devices which they use in assessing volcanoes worldwide to predict which of them will erupt violently.
The fact that The U.S. Geological Survey missed the call on Mount St. Helens1980 Blastsupports which of the following points?
Monitoring efforts need to be combined with appropriate evacuation strategies.
Technology needs to be specifically designed to predict volcanoes.
It is easier to predict volcanoes in the Philippines than it is in Seattle.
Even with the help of technology, it is still difficult to predict when volcanoes will erupt.
Why does the author mention the successful prediction of the eruption of MountPinatubo?
To support the claim that the art of volcano prediction will never be fully mastered
To provide a contrast with the failure to predict the Mount St. Helens eruption
To show that volcano prediction had been perfected by 1991
To show that successful volcano prediction depends on concentrating on the volcano after an eruptive phase has begun
The word manifestationin the passage is closest in meaning to
indication
measurement
possibility
effects
According to paragraph 3, why is superheated steam in a surface hot spring a sign that an eruption may be developing?
Superheated steam shows how hot the subsurface rocks have become.
Superheated steam occurs only after the volcanic cone has become extremely hot.
Superheated steam indicates an increase in gas emissions.
Superheated steam is likely to come from water-rich magma near the surface.
The word principalin the passage is closest in meaning to
most important
most common
most accurate
Empirical
In paragraph 4, the mention of the accurate prediction of recent eruptions of Mount St. Helens serves to
emphasize the decisive role of new technology in accurately predicting when a volcano is likely to erupt
illustrate the effectiveness of tilt meters in predicting volcanic eruptions
provide an example of how monitoring certain distinctive patterns of earthquake activity can provide a reliable indication of where an eruption will occur
support the claim that the rate at which magma rises is a good indicator of when an eruption will occur
According to paragraph 5, each of the following features of the appearance of the volcano Paricutin was a surprise to scientists EXCEPT
the particular site at which it appeared
the geologic zone in which it appeared
the rate at which it developed
the timing of its appearance

Earths surface is not made up of a single sheet of rock that forms a crust but rather a number of tectonic plates that fit closely, like the pieces of a giant jigsaw puzzle. Some plates carry islands or continents, others form the seafloor. All are slowly moving because the plates float on a denser semi-liquid mantle, the layer between the crust and Earths core. The plates have edges that are spreading ridges (where two plates are moving apart and new seafloor is being created), subduction zones (where two plates collide and one plunges beneath the other), or transform faults (where two plates neither converge nor diverge but merely move past one another). It is at the boundaries between plates that most of Earths volcanism and earthquake activity occur.
Generally speaking, the interiors of plates are geologically uneventful. However, there are exceptions. A glance at a map of the Pacific Ocean reveals that there are many islands far out at sea that are actually volcanoes----many no longer active, some overgrown with coral----that originated from activity at points in the interior of the Pacific Plate that forms the Pacific seafloor.

How can volcanic activity occur so far from a plate boundary? The Hawaiian islands provide a very instructive answer. Like many other island groups, they form a chain. 
  The Hawaiian Islands Chain extends northwest from the island of Hawaii. In the 1840s American geologist James Daly observed that the different Hawaii islands seem to share a similar geologic
 evolution but are progressively more eroded, and therefore probable older, toward the northwest. Then in 1963, in the early days of the development of the theory of plate tectonics. 
 Canadian geophysicist Tuzo Wilson realized that this age progression could result if the islands were formed on a surface plate moving over a fixed volcanic source in the interior.
 Wilson suggested that the long chain of volcanoes stretching northwest from Hawaii is simply the surface expression of a long-lived volcanic source located beneath the tectonic plate in the mantle.
Todays most northwest island would have been the first to form. They as the plate moved slowly northwest, new volcanic islands would have forms as the plate moved over the volcanic source. 
 The most recent island, Hawaii, would be at the end of the chain and is now over the volcanic source.

Although this idea was not immediately accepted, the dating of lavas in the Hawaii (and other) chains showed that their ages increase away from the presently active volcano, just as Daly had suggested. Wilsons analysis of these data is now a central part of plate tectonics. Most volcanoes that occur in the interiors of plates are believed to be produced by mantle plumes, columns of molten rock that rise from deep within the mantle. A volcano remains an active hot spot as long as it is over the plume. The plumes apparently originate at great depths, perhaps as deep as the boundary between the core and the mantle, and many have been active for a very long time. The oldest volcanoes in the Hawaii hot-spot trail have ages close to 80 million years. Other islands, including Tahiti and Easter Islands in the pacific, Reunion and Mauritius in the India Ocean, and indeed most of the large islands in the worlds oceans, owe their existence to mantle plumes.
The oceanic volcanic islands and their hot-spot trails are thus especially useful for geologist because they record the past locations of the plate over a fixed source. They therefore permit the reconstruction of the process of seafloor spreading, and consequently of the geography of continents and of ocean basins in the past. For example, given the current position of the Pacific Plate, Hawaii is above the Pacific Ocean hot spot. So the position of The Pacific Plate 50 million years ago can be determined by moving it such that a 50-million-year-old volcano in the hot-spot trail sits at the location of Hawaii today. However because the ocean basins really are short-lived features on geologic times scale, reconstruction the worlds geography by backtracking along the hot-spot trail works only for the last 5 percent or so of geologic time.
 
The author mentions spreading ridges, subduction zones, and transform faultsin order to
illustrate that the boundaries of tectonic plates are neat, thin lines
explain why some tectonic plates carry islands or continents while others form the seafloor
explain the complex nature of the edges of tectonic plates
provide examples of areas of tectonic plates where little geologic action occurs
The word convergein the passage is closest in meaning t
expand
form
rise
move closer
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage paragraph 2? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information
Volcanic activity is responsible for the formation of the Pacific seafloor in the interior of the Pacific Plate.
Many volcanoes in the Pacific Ocean are no longer active and have become islands that support coral.
There are many islands in the Pacific Ocean that originated as volcanoes in the interior of the Pacific Plate.
The map of the Pacific Ocean reveals fewer volcanic islands than there truly are because many are no longer active and some are completely overgrown with coral.
The word instructivein the passage (paragraph 3) is closest in meaning to
clear
detailed
informative
familiar
The word erodedin the passage(paragraph 3)is closest in meaning to
worn down
scattered
developed
deserted
In paragraph 3, what is the relationship between the scientific contribution of James Daly and Tuzo Wilson
Wilson provided an explanation for the observations made by Daly.
Wilson challenged the theory proposed by Daly.
Wilson found numerous examples of island chains that supported Dalys theory.
Wilson popularized the explanation of volcanic island formation formulated by Daly.
Why does the author provide the information that the dating of lavas in the Hawaii (and other) chains showed that their ages increase away from the presently active volcano
To point out differences between the Hawaii island chain and other volcanic island chains
To question the idea that all the islands in an island chain have been formed by volcanic activity
To explain why Wilson hypothesis was initially difficult to accept
To provide evidence in support of Dalys and Wilsons ideas about how the Hawaii islands were formed
According to paragraph 4, which of the following is true of mantle plumes
They exist close to the surface of tectonic plates.
They cause most of the volcanic activity that occurs in the interiors of plates.
They are rarely active for long period of time.
They get increasingly older away from the present hot spots.
According to paragraph 5, volcanic islands help geologists to
reconstruct past geography
detect changes in mantle plumes
measure the rigidity of tectonic plates
explain why the seafloor spreads
What can be inferred about the Pacific Plate from paragraph 5?
The hot spots on the Pacific Plate are much older than the ones located on the other tectonic plates.
Most of the volcanic sources beneath the Pacific Plate have become extinct.
The Pacific Plate has moved a distance equal to the length of the Hawaiian Island chain in the past 50 million years.
The Pacific Plate is located above fewer mantle plumes than other plates are.
The word currentin the passage (paragraph 5) is closest in meaning t
original
ideal
relative
present
According to paragraph 5, why are geologists unable to trace back the entire geologic of continents from hot-spot trails
Hot spots have existed for only about 5 percent of geologic time.
Hawaii did not exist 50 millions years ago.
Oceanic basins that contained old hot-spot trails disappeared a long time ago.
Hot-spot trails can be reconstructed only for island chains.

How do predators affect populations of the prey animals? The answer is not as simple as might be thought. Moose reached Isle Royale in Lake Superior by crossing over winter ice and multiplied freely there in isolation without predators. When wolves later reached the island, naturalists widely assumed that the wolves would play a key role in controlling the moose population. Careful studies have demonstrated, however, that this is not the case. The wolves eat mostly old or diseased animals that would not survive long anyway. In general, the moose population is controlled by food availability, disease and other factors rather than by wolves.
When experimental populations are set up under simple laboratory conditions, the predator often exterminates its pre and then becomes extinct itself, having nothing left to eat. However, if safe areas like those prey animals have in the wild are provided, the prey population drops to low level but not extinction. Low prey population levels then provide inadequate food for the predators, causing the predator population to decrease. When this occurs, the prey population can rebound. In this situation the predator and prey population may continue in this cyclical pattern for some time.
Population cycles are characteristic of small mammals, and they sometimes appear to be brought about by predators. Ecologists studying hare populations have found that the North American snow shoe hare follows a roughly ten-year cycle. Its numbers fall tenfold to thirty in a typical cycle, and a hundredfold change can occur. Two factors appear to be generating the cycle: food plants and predators.
The preferred foods of snowshoe hares are willow and birch twigs. As hare density increases, the quantity of these twigs decreases, forcing the hares to feed on low-quality high-fiber food. Lower birth rates, low juvenile survivorship, and low growth rates follow, so there is a corresponding decline in hare abundance. Once the hare population has declined, it takes two to three year for the quantity of twigs to recover.
A key predator of the snowshoe hare is the Canada lynx. The Canada lynx shows a ten-year cycle of abundance that parallels the abundance cycle of hares. As hare numbers fall, so do lynx numbers, as their food supply depleted.
What causes the predator-prey oscillations? Do increasing number of hares lead to overharvesting of plants, which in turn results in reduced hare populations, or do increasing numbers of lynx lead to overharvesting hares? Field experiments carried out by Charles Krebs and coworkers in 1992 provide an answer. Krebs investigated experimental plots in Canadas Yukon territory that contained hare populations. When food was added to those plots (no food effect) and predators were excluded (no predator effect) from an experimental area, hare numbers increased tenfold and stayed therethe cycle was lost. However, the cycle was retained if either of the factors was allowed to operate alone: if predators were excluded but food was not added (food effect alone), or if food was added in the presence of predators (predator effect alone). Thus both factors can affect the cycle, which, in practice, seems to be generated by conjunction of the two factors.
Predators are an essential factor in maintaining communities that are rich and diverse in species. Without predators, the species that is the best competitor for food, shelter, nesting sites, and other environmental resources tends to dominate and exclude the species with which it competes.  This phenomenon is known as competitor exclusion.  However, if the community contains a predator of the strongest competitor species, then the population of that competitor is controlled.  Thus even the less competitive species are able to survive.  For example, sea stars prey on a variety of bivalve mollusks and prevent these bivalves from monopolizing habitats on the sea floor. This opens up space for many other organisms. When sea stars are removed, species diversity falls sharply. Therefore, from the stand point of diversity, it is usually a mistake to eliminate a major predator from a community.
 
In paragraph 1, why does the author discuss the moose and wolves on Isle Royal?
To provide an example of predators moving to new habitats by following migrating prey
To show that the interactions between predator populations and prey populations are not always might be expected
To suggest that prey populations are more influenced by predation than food availability and disease
To argue that studies of geographically isolated populations tend not to be useful to naturalists
The word reboundin the passage (paragraph 2) is closest in meaning to
escape
recover
survive
resist
Paragraph 2 implies which of the following about experimental environments in which predators become extinct
They may yield results that do not accurate predict changes of populations in the wild.
In these environments, the prey species is better adapted than the predator species.
These environments are appropriate only for studying small populations of predators and prey.
They are unrealistic because some predators are also the prey of other predators.
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraphs 2 and 3 about the small mammals that experience population cycles?
Their population cycles are not affected by predators.
Their predatorspopulations periodically disappear.
They typically undergo ten-year cycles.
They have access to places safe from predators.
The word roughlyin the passage is closest in meaning to
usually
repeating
approximately
observable
The word generatingin the passage is closest in meaning to
producing
changing
speeding up
smoothing out
According to paragraph 4, all of the following are true of the food of snowshoe hares EXCEPT
The preferred food fore hares consists of willow and birch twigs.
High fiber food is the most nutritious for hares.
Depletion of the supply of willow and birch twigs cause low birth and growth rates.
The food supply takes two or three years to recover after a peak in hare population density.
The word conjunctionin the passage (paragraph 6) is closest in meaning to
determination
combination
alternation
transformation
According to paragraph 5, which of the following statements best characterizes the abundance cycle of the Canada lynx
It closely follows the cycle the snowshoe hare.
When the numbers of lynx fall, the numbers of snowshoe hares soon decrease.
When hare numbers decrease, lynx numbers increase.
It is not clearly related to the availability of lynx food.
According to paragraph 6, which of the following was true of the hare population cycle in Krebss experiment
The effects of providing food while at the same time introducing predators cancelled each other, so there was no cycle.
The cycle existed when either the food supply was limited or there were predators.
There was a cycle when there were no predators and food was supplied.
If the hares had places to hide from the lynx, the hare population increased tenfold and then remained at that level.
According to paragraph 7, which of the following statements correctly characterizes the effect of sea stars on the ecosystem in which they are predators of bivalves
Bivalve population are kept low, allowing species that compete with bivalves to survive.
The numbers of most species of bivalves are greatly reduced, leaving the bivalve species that is the strongest competitor to dominate among the survivors.
Biological diversity begins to decrease because many bivalve species disappear.
Sea stars dominate at first but then die off because of the depleted food supply.
According to paragraph 7, which of the following is true of the phenomenon of competitor exclusion?
It results in more diverse communities.
It requires the presence of predators.
It affects all competitions equally.
It happens only when there is a dominant competitor.

The surface of Mars shows a wide range of geologic features, including huge volcanoes-the largest known in the solar system-and extensive impact cratering. Three very large volcanoes are found on the Tharsis bulge, an enormous geologic area near Marss equator. Northwest of Tharsis is the largest volcano of all: Olympus Mons, with a height of 25 kilometers and measuring some 700 kilometers in diameter at its base. The three large volcanoes on the Tharsis bulge are a little smaller-a mere 18 kilometers high.
None of these volcanoes was formed as a result of collisions between plates of the Martian crust-there is no plate motion on Mars. Instead, they are shield volcanoes-volcanoes with broad, sloping slides formed by molten rock. All four show distinctive lava channels and other flow features similar to those found on shield volcanoes on Earth. Images of the Martian surface reveal many hundreds of volcanoes. Most of the largest volcanoes are associated with the Tharsis bulge, but many smaller ones are found in the northern plains
The great height of Martian volcanoes is a direct consequence of the planets low surface gravity. As lava flows and spreads to form a shield volcano, the volcanos eventual height depends on the new mountains ability to support its own weight. The lower the gravity, the lesser the weight and the greater the height of the mountain. It is no accident that Maxwell Mons on Venus and the Hawaiian shield volcanoes on Earth rise to about the same height (about 10 kilometers) above their respective bases-Earth and Venus have similar surface gravity. Marss surface gravity is only 40 percent that of Earth, so volcanoes rise roughly 2.5 times as high. Are the Martian shield volcanoes still active? Scientists have no direct evidence for recent or ongoing eruptions, but if these volcanoes were active as recently as 100 million years ago (an estimate of the time of last eruption based on the extent of impact cratering on their slopes), some of them may still be at least intermittently active. Millions of years, though, may pass between eruptions.
Another prominent feature of Marss surface is cratering. The Mariner spacecraft found that the surface of Mars, as well as that of its two moons, is pitted with impact craters formed by meteoroids falling in from space. As on our Moon, the smaller craters are often filled with surface matter-mostly dust-confirming that Mars is a dry desert world. However, Martian craters get filled in considerably faster than their lunar counterparts. On the Moon, ancient craters less than 100 meters across (corresponding to depths of about 20 meters) have been obliterated, primarily by meteoritic erosion. On Mars, there are relatively few craters less than 5 kilometers in diameter. The Martian atmosphere is an efficient erosive agent, with Martian winds transporting dust from place to place and erasing surface features much faster than meteoritic impacts alone can obliterate them.
As on the Moon, the extent of large impact cratering (i.e. craters too big to have been filled in by erosion since they were formed) serves as an age indicator for the Martian surface. Age estimates ranging from four billion years for Marss southern highlands to a few hundred million years in the youngest volcanic areas were obtained in this way.
 The detailed appearance of Martian impact craters provides an important piece of information about conditions just below the planets surface. Martian craters are surrounded 
by ejecta (debris formed as a result of an impact) that looks quite different from its lunar counterparts. A comparison of the Copernicus crater on the Moon with the (fairly typical) 
crater Yuty on Mars demonstrates the differences. The ejecta surrounding the lunar crater is just what one would expect from an explosion ejecting a large volume of dust, soil, and boulders.
 However, the ejecta on Mars gives the distinct impression of a liquid that has splashed or flowed out of crater. Geologists think that this fluidized ejecta crater indicates that a layer 
of permafrost, or water ice, lies just a few meters under the surface. Explosive impacts heated and liquefied the ice, resulting in the fluid appearance of the ejecta.  
 
The word enormous in the passage is closest in meaning to
Important
Extremely large
Highly unusual
Active
According to paragraph 1, Olympus Mons differs from volcanoes on the Tharsis bulge in that Olympus Mons
Has more complex geologic features
Shows less impact cratering
Is taller
Was formed at a later time
The word distinctive in the passage is closest in meaning to
Deep
Complex
Characteristic
Ancient
According to paragraphs 1 and 2, which of the following is NOT true of the shield volcanoes on the Tharsis bulge?
They have broad, sloping sides.
They are smaller than the largest volcano on Mars.
They have channels that resemble the lava channels of volcanoes on Earth.
They are over 25 kilometers tall.
The word roughly in the passage is closest in meaning to
Typically
Frequently
Actually
Approximately
In paragraph 3, why does the author compare Maxwell Mons on Venus to the Hawaiian shield volcanoes on Earth?
To help explain the relationship between surface gravity and volcano height
To explain why Marss surface gravity is only 40 percent of Earths
To point out differences between the surface gravity of Earth and the surface gravity of Venus
To argue that there are more similarities than differences between volcanoes on different planets
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Although direct evidence of recent eruptions is lacking, scientists believe that these volcanoes were active as recently as 100 million years ago.
Scientists estimate that volcanoes active more recently than 100 years ago will still have extensive impact cratering on their slopes.
If, as some evidence suggests, these volcanoes erupted as recently as 100 million years ago, they may continue to be intermittently active.
Although these volcanoes were active as recently as 100 million years ago, there is no direct evidence of recent or ongoing eruptions.
The word considerably in the passage is closest in meaning to
Frequently
Significantly
Clearly
Surprisingly
According to paragraph 4, what is demonstrated by the fact that craters fill in much faster on Mars than on the Moon?
Erosion from meteoritic impacts takes place more quickly on Mars than on the Moon.
There is more dust on Mars than on the Moon.
The surface of Mars is a dry desert.
Wind is a powerful eroding force on Mars.
In paragraph 4, why does the author point out that Mars has few ancient craters that are less than 5 kilometers in diameter?
To explain why scientists believe that the surface matter filling Martian craters is mostly dust
To explain why scientists believe that the impact craters on Mars were created by meteoroids
To support the claim that the Martian atmosphere is an efficient erosive agent
To argue that Mars experienced fewer ancient impacts than the Moon did
According to paragraph 5, what have scientists been able to determine from studies of large impact cratering on Mars?
Some Martian volcanoes are much older than was once thought.
The age of Marss surface can vary from area to area.
Large impact craters are not reliable indicators of age in areas with high volcanic activity.
Some areas of the Martian surface appear to be older than they actually are.
According to paragraph 6, the ejecta of Marss crater Yuty differs from the ejecta of the Moons Copernicus crater in that the ejecta of the Yuty crater
Has now become part of a permafrost layer
Contains a large volume of dust, soil and boulders
Suggests that liquid once came out of the surface at the crater site
Was thrown a comparatively long distance from the center of the crater

In the late thirteenth century, northern Italian cities such as Genoa, Florence, and Venice began an economic resurgence that made them into the most important economic centers of Europe. By the seventeenth century, however, other European powers had taken over, as the Italian cities lost much of their economic might.
 
This decline can be seen clearly in the changes that affected Venetian shipping and trade. First, Venics intermediary functions in the Adriatic Sea, where it had dominated the business of 
shipping for other parties, were lost to direct trading. In the fifteenth century there was little problem recruiting sailors to row the galleys (large ships propelled by oars): 
guilds (business associations) were required to provide rowers, and through a draft system free citizens served compulsorily when called for. In the early sixteenth century the shortage 
of rowers was not serious because the demand for galleys was limited by a move to round ships (round-hulled ships with more cargo space), with required fewer rowers. 
 But the shortage of crews proved to be a greater and greater problem, despite continuous appeal to Venics tradition of maritime greatness.
 Even though sailors wages doubled among the northern Italian cities from 1550 to 1590, this did not elicit an increased supply. 

The problem in shipping extended to the Arsenale, Venices huge and powerful shipyard. Timber ran short, and it was necessary to procure it from farther and farther away. In ancient Roman times, the Italian peninsula had great forest of fir preferred for warships, but scarcity was apparent as early as the early fourteenth century. Arsenale officers first brought timber from the foothills of the Alps, then from north toward Trieste, and finally from across the Adriatic. Private shipbuilders were required to buy their oak abroad. As the costs of shipbuilding rose, Venice clung to its outdated standard while the Dutch were innovation in the lighter and more easily handled ships.
The step from buying foreign timber to buying foreign ships was regarded as a short one, especially when complaints were heard in the latter sixteenth century that the standards and traditions of the Arsenale were running down. Work was stretched out and done poorly. Older workers had been allowed to stop work a half hour before the regular time, and in 1601 younger works left with them. Merchants complained that the privileges reserved for Venetian-built and owned ships were first extended to those Venetians who bought ships from abroad and then to foreign-built and owned vessels. Historian Frederic Lane observes that after the loss of ships in battle in the late sixteenth century, the shipbuilding industry no longer had the capacity to recover that it had displayed at the start of the century.
The conventional explanation for the loss of Venetian dominance in trade is establishment of the Portuguese direct sea route to the East, replacing the overland Silk Road from the Black sea and the highly profitable Indian Ocean-caravan-eastern Mediterranean route to Venice. The Portuguese Vasco da Gamas Voyage around southern Africa to India took place at the end of the fifteenth century, and by 1502 the trans- Abrabian caravan route had been cut off by political unrest.
The Venetian Council finally allowed round ships to enter the trade that was previously reserved for merchant galleys, thus reducing transport cost by one third. Prices of spices delivered by ship from the eastern Mediterranean came to equal those of spices transported by Portuguesevessels, but the increase in quantity with both routes in operation drove the price far down. Gradually, Venices role as a storage and distribution center for spices and silk, dyes cotton, and gold decayed, and by the early seventeenth century Venice had lost its monopoly in markets such as France and southern Germany.
Venetian shipping had started to decline from about 1530-before the entry into the Mediterranean of large volumes of Dutch and British shipping-and was clearly outclassed by the end of the century. A contemporary of Shakespeare (1564-1616) observed that the productivity of Italian shipping had declined, compared with that of the British, because of conservatism and loss of expertise. Moreover, Italian sailors were deserting and emigrating, and captains, no longer recruited from the ranks of nobles, were weak on navigations.
 
The word compulsorily in the passage is closest in meaning to
for free
for a time
by requirement
by design
The word resurgence in the passage is closest in meaning to
transformation
comeback
program
expansion
According to paragraph 2, which of the following contributed to the decline of Venetian shipping?
The loss of trade in Adriatic Sea
The move from galleys to round ships
The decreased demand for galleys
The doubling of sailors wages
All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 2 as ways that Venice provided rowers for its galley EXCEPT
Requiring business associations to provide sailors
Recruiting sailors from other cities in northern Italy
Drafting Venetian citizens into services as rowers
Appealing to the traditions of Venice as a sea power.
The word outdated in the passage is closest in meaning to
strict
enforced
improved
old-fashioned
According to paragraphs 3, why did the building of ships in Venetian shipyards become increasingly expensive?
The wages of officers and workers in the Arsenale kept rising
Roman shipyards were using all the available fir trees for the warships
The timber used in the shipbuilding had to be brought from farther and farther away
Venetian standards required that shipbuilders use top-quality materials.
All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 3 and 4 as contributing to the problems of the Venetian shipbuilding industry at the end of the sixteenth century EXCEPT
The quality of work performed in the Arsenale had declined
Venetianbuilt ships were heavy and generally inefficient
Arsenale shipbuilders worked more slowly
Only a few merchants controlled the buying and selling of most of the Venetian-built ships
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage?Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
The loss of ships in battle at the end of the sixteenth century showed that Venetian shipbuilders lacked the skills they had possessed at the beginning of the century.
Venetian shipbuilding failed to quickly replace the ships lost in battle at the end of the sixteenth century as it would have done earlier in the century.
Frederic Lane noted that Venice lost ships in battle at the end of the sixteenth century, showing that Venetian shipbuilding was not longer known for its reliability.
Venetian shipbuilding had been known for its high quality of work at the beginning of the sixteenth century, but toward the end of the century Venetian ships were poorer in quality.
The word conventional in the passage is closest in meaning to
informal
logical
correct
usual
Why does the author mention Vasco da Gamas Voyage around southern Africa to India in the passage?
to indicate how the Portuguese came to challenge Venetian dominance of trade with the East
to explain why political troubles resulted in the closing of the usual routes to India
to prove that Venetians could not sail round ships as efficiently as sailors from other countries did
to show that Venetian reliance on round ships rather than galleys proved to be weakness
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 6 about the Venetian Councils decision concerning the use of round ships?
It resulted in a return to profitable in luxury goods for Venetian merchants.
Ultimately it did not restore the superiority in the spice trade that Venice had enjoyed earlier.
It eventually enabled Venetian merchants to increase the quantity and price of the spices they sold in Europe.
. It means a long-awaited improvement in the fortunes of the shipbuilding industry in Venice.
According to paragraphs 6, in the sixteenth century the price of spices declined because
France and Germany established monopolies and dictated prices
Venetian merchant galleys competed with Venetian round ships for the spice trade
More spices were available because both the Venetians and the Portuguese were importing them
Increased demand for silk, dyes, cotton and gold meant that people had less money to spend on spices.

The evolutionary history of plants has been marked by a series of adaptations.  " >The ancestors of plants were photosynthetic single-celled organisms probably similar to today's algae. Like modern algae, the organisms that gave rise to plants presumablylacked true roots, stems, leaves, and complex reproductive structures such as flowers.All of these features appeared later in the evolutionary history of plants. Of todays different groups of algae, green algae are probably the most similar to ancestral plants. This supposition stems from the close phylogenetic (natural evolutionary) relationship between the two groups. DNA comparisons have shown that green algae are plants closest living relatives. In addition, other lines of evidence support the hypothesis that land plants evolved from ancestral green algae used the same type of chlorophyll and accessory pigments in photosynthesis as do land plants. This would not be true of red and brown algae. Green algae store food as starch, as do land plants and have cell walls made of cellulose, similar in composition to those of land plants. Again, the good storage and cell wall molecules of red and brown algae are different.
Today green algae live mainly in freshwater, suggesting that their early evolutionary history may have occurred in freshwater habitats. If so, the green algae would have been subjected to environmental pressures that resulted in adaptations that enhanced their potential to give rise to land-dwelling or organisms.

 The environmental conditions of freshwater habitats, unlike those of ocean habitats, are highly variable.  Water temperature can fluctuate seasonally or even daily and changing level of rainfall can lead to fluctuations in the concentration of chemical in 
the water or even to period in which the aquatic habitat dries up.  Ancient fresh water green algae must have evolved features that enable them to withstand extremes of 
temperature and periods of dryness. These adaptations served their descendant well as they invaded land.

The terrestrial world is green now, but it did not start out that way. When plants first made the transition ashore more than 400 million years ago, the land was barren and desolate, inhospitable to life. From a plants evolutionary view point, however, it was also a land of opportunity, free of competitors and predators and full of carbon dioxide and sunlight (the raw materials for photosynthesis, which are present in far higher concentrations in air than in water).So once natural selection had shaped the adaptations that helped plants overcome the obstacles to terrestrial living, plants prospered and diversified.
When plants pioneered the land, they faced a range of challenges posed by terrestrial environments. On land, the supportive buoyancy of water is missing, the plant is no longer bathed in a nutrient solution, and air tends to dry things out. These conditions favored the evolution of the structures that support the body, vessels that transport water and nutrients to all parts of plant, and structures that conserve water. The resulting adaptations to dry land include some structural features that arose early in plant evolution; now these features are common to virtually all land plant. They include roots or root like structures, a waxy cuticle that covers the surfaces of leaves and stems and limits the evaporation of water, and pores called stomata in leaves and stems that allow gas exchange but close when water is scarce, thus reducing water loss. Other adaptations occurred later in the transition to terrestrial life and now wide spread but not universal among plants. These include conducting vessels that transport water and minerals upward from the roots and that move the photosynthetic products from the leavesto the rest of the plant body and the stiffening substance lignin, which support the plant body, helping it expose maximum surface area to sunlight.
These adaptations allowed an increasing diversity of plant forms to exploit dry land. Life on land, however, also required new methods of transporting sperm to eggs. Unlike aquatic and marine forms, land plants cannot always rely on water currents to carry their sex cells and disperse their fertilized eggs. So the most successful groups of land plants are those that evolved methods of fertilized sex cell dispersal that are independent of water and structures that protest developing embryos from drying out. Protected embryos and waterless dispersal of sex cells were achieved with the origin of seed plants and the key evolutionary innovations that they introduced: pollen, seeds, and later, flowers and fruits.
 
The word presumably in the passage is closest in meaning to
originally
supposedly
obviously
usually
According to paragraph 1, all of the following are true of ancestral plants EXCEPT
They had cellulose-based cell walls.
They were closely related to green algae
They were able to store nutrients
They had a sophisticated multicellular structure.
The phrase subjected to in the passage is closest in
restricted by
distant from
exposed to
combined with
What can be inferred from paragraph 3 about ancient green algae?
They lived in a generally wet environment that was sometimes dry
They adapted better to changes in water temperature than did to other changes in the environment.
They inhabited areas that were close to the ocean.
They had lived primarily on land
The word desolatein the passage is closest in meaning to
dusty
hardened
deserted
dried out
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Terrestrial plants had the advantages of not having rivals and having easy access to photosynthetic material
The abundance of photosynthetic material made life on land easier for pioneering plants
Once plants had eliminated their competitors and their predators, their evolutionary process proceeded smoothly.
Plant evolution eliminated competitors and made the process of photosynthesis more efficient.
According to paragraph 4, which of the following is true about the terrestrial world at the time it was colonized by plants?
it was exposed to high levels of solar radiation
it contained a limited supply of carbon dioxide
it had developed 400million years earlier
it lacked the presence of any organisms
According to paragraph 5, all of the following are problems that early terrestrial plants had to overcome Except
a tendency to become dry
the inability to limit surface sunlight
the absence of a structure to support the body of the plant
the inability to transport water and minerals through the plant
the word posed in the passage is closest in meaning to
shared
presented
strengthened
concealed
What purpose does paragraph 5 serve in the larger discussion of the origins of terrestrial plants?
To emphasize how long it took for ancestral plants to adjust to life on land
To disprove the argument that land plants adapted easily to their new terrestrial environment
To explain how plant colonization changed the physical environment of the terrestrial world
To describe how ancestral plants solved the problems they confirmed in colonizing
According to Paragraph 6, The adaptation made by terrestrial plants had which of the following effect?
Plants developed reproductive strategies usable in both land and water environment
the plant diversity achieved in water environments diminished on land
seed plants became the dominant species among plants
a greater range of plants was able to develop
Which of the following best describes the authors presentation of the information about land plants
the author provided and overview of the evolutionary relationships between specific species of algae and land plants
The author discusses the transformation plants underwent in the process of changing from an aquatic to a terrestrial environment
the author establishes a pattern of similarity between major land and water pant groups
The author resents evidence to support the hypothesis that plants first fully evolved in water before finding their way to land

Where does the water in a lake come from, and how does water leave it? Water enters a lake from inflowing rivers, from underwater seeps and springs, from overland flow off the surrounding land, and from rain falling directly on the lake surface. Water leaves a lake via outflowing rivers, by soaking into the bed of the lake, and by evaporation. So much is obvious.
The questions become more complicated when actual volumes of water are considered: how much water enters and leaves by each route? Discovering the inputs and outputs of rivers is a matter of measuring the discharges of every inflowing and outflowing stream and river. Then exchanges with the atmosphere are calculated by finding the difference between the gains from rain, as measured (rather roughly) by rain gauges, and the losses by evaporation, measured with models that correct for the other sources of water loss. For the majority of lakes, certainly those surrounded by forests, input from overland flow is too small to have a noticeable effect. Changes in lake level not explained by river flows plus exchanges with the atmosphere must be due to the net difference between what seeps into the lake from the groundwater and what leaks into the groundwater. Note the word "net": measuring the actual amounts of groundwater seepage into the lake and out of the lake is a much more complicated matter than merely inferring their difference.
Once all this information has been gathered, it becomes possible to judge whether a lakes flow is mainly due to its surface inputs and outputs or to its underground inputs and outputs.  If the former are greater, the lake is a surface-water-dominated lake; if the latter, it is a seepage-dominated lake.  Occasionally, common sense tells you which of these two possibilities applies. For example, a pond in hilly country that maintains a steady water level all through a dry summer in spite of having no streams flowing into it must obviously be seepage dominated. Conversely, a pond with a stream flowing in one end and out the other, which dries up when the stream dries up, is clearly surface water dominated. 
By whatever means, a lake is constantly gaining water and losing water: its water does not just sit there, or, anyway, not for long. This raises the matter of a lakes residence time. The residence time is the average length of time that any particular molecule of water remains in the lake, and it is calculated by dividing the volume of water in the lake by the rate at which water leaves the lake. The residence time is an average; the time spent in the lake by a given molecule (if we could follow its fate) would depend on the route it took: it might flow through as part of the fastest, most direct current, or it might circle in a backwater for an indefinitely long time.
Residence times vary enormously. They range from a few days for small lakes up to several hundred years for large ones; Lake Tahoe, in California, has a residence time of 700 years. The residence times for the Great Lakes of North America, namely, Lakes Superior, Michigan, Huron, Erie, and Ontario, are, respectively, 190,100,22,2.5, and 6 years. Lake Eries is the lowest: although its area is larger than Lake Ontario s, its volume is less than one-third as great because it is so shallow-less than 20 meters on average.
A given lake's residence time is by no means a fixed quantity. It depends on the rate at which water enters the lake, and that depends on the rainfall and the evaporation rate. Climatic change (the result of global warming?) is dramatically affecting the residence times of some lakes in northwestern Ontario. Canada. In the period 1970 to 1986, rainfall in the area decreased from 1,000 millimeters to 650 millimeters per annum, while above-average temperatures speeded up the evapotranspiration rate (the rate at which water is lost to the atmosphere through evaporation and the processes of plant life).
The result has been that the residence time of one of the lakes increased from 5 to 18 years during the study period. The slowing down of water renewal leads to a chain of further consequences; it causes dissolved chemicals to become increasingly concentrated, and this, in turn, has a marked effect on all living things in the lake.
 
The phrase "So much" in the passage refers to
the negative effects of overland flow, rain, and evaporation on river water levels
water that a lake loses to outflowing rivers, to the lake bed, and to evaporation
the importance of rivers to the maintenance of lake water levels
the information given about ways that water can enter or exit a lake
The word "gains" in the passage is closest in meaning to
results
increases
resources
savings
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 2 about the movement of water into a lake?
Heavy rain accounts for most of the water that enters into lakes.
Rainfall replaces approximately the amount of water lost through evaporation.
Overland flow into lakes is reduced by the presence of forests.
Seepage has a smaller effect on water level than any other input.
Why does the author use the phrase "Note the word 'net'" in the passage?
To emphasize the impact of seepage on water levels.
To point out that seepage is calculated differently from river flows and atmospheric exchanges.
To compare the different methods of calculating seepage.
To emphasize the difficulty of obtaining specific values for seepage inputs and outputs.
The word "Conversely" in paragraph 3 meaning to
on the other hand
in the same way
in other words
on average
According to paragraph 3, which of the following best describes a seepage-dominated lake?
A lake that is fed by streams but still has fluctuating water levels
A lake with a constant water level that has no streams or rivers as inputs
A lake with a stream flowing into it and a stream flowing out of it
A lake that has surface and underground inputs but loses water during dry seasons
It can be inferred from paragraph 4 that the length of time a given molecule of water remains in a lake
depends entirely upon the average speed of a lake' s currents
can be measured by the volume of the lake alone
can be greater or lesser than the residence time
is similar to the length of time all other molecules remain in that lake
According to paragraph 5, Lake Erie's residence time is lower than Lake Ontario;s for which of the following reasons?
Lake Erie has a larger area than Lake Ontario.
Lake Ontario is shallower than Lake Erie.
Lake Ontario has a greater volume than Lake Erie.
Lake Erie receives less rainfall than Lake Ontario.
Why does the author discuss the Great Lakes in paragraph 5?
To demonstrate the extent to which residence times vary from lake to lake
To illustrate how residence times are calculated for specific lakes
To argue that the residence time of a lake increases with area
To emphasize that Lake Tahoe' s residence time is unusually long
The word "further" in the passage is closest in meaning to
expected
additional
serious
unfortunate
According to paragraph 6, which of the following explains the increase in residence time of some lakes of northwestern Ontario?
The amount of water flowing into the lakes has increased.
The rate of evaporation has decreased more sharply than the amount of rainfall.
The renewal of the lakes' water has slowed due to changes in climate.
Plants have required less water from the lakes
According to paragraph 6, residence time is affected by all of the following EXCEPT
amount of rainfall
rate of evaporation
temperature of surrounding air
concentration of chemicals in lake water

In the Mesa Verde area of the ancient North American Southwest, living patterns changed in the thirteenth century, with large numbers of people moving into large communal dwellings called pueblos, often constructed at the edges of canyons, especially on the sides of cliffs. Abandoning small extended-family households to move into these large pueblos with dozens if not hundreds of other people was probably traumatic. Few of the cultural traditions and rules that today allow us to deal with dense populations existed for these people accustomed to household autonomy and the ability to move around the landscape almost at will. And besides the awkwardness of having to share walls with neighbors, living in aggregated pueblos introduced other problems.  For people in cliff dwellings, hauling water, wood, and food to their homes was a major chore. The stress on local resources, especially in the firewood needed for daily cooking and warmth, was particularly intense, and conditions in aggregated pueblos were not very hygienic. 
Given all the disadvantages of living in aggregated towns, why did people in the thirteenth century move into these closely packed quarters? For transitions of such suddenness, archaeologists consider either pull factors (benefits that drew families together) or push factors (some external threat or crisis that forced people to aggregate). In this case, push explanations dominate.
Population growth is considered a particularly influential push. After several generations of population growth, people packed the landscape in densities so high that communal pueblos may have been a necessary outcome. Around Sand Canyon, for example, populations grew from 5 -12 people per square kilometer in the tenth century to as many as 30 - 50 by the 1200s. As densities increased, domestic architecture became larger, culminating in crowded pueblos. Some scholars expand on this idea by emphasizing a corresponding need for arable land to feed growing numbers of people: construction of small dams, reservoirs, terraces, and field houses indicates that farmers were intensifying their efforts during the 1200s. Competition for good farmland may also have prompted people to bond together to assert rights over the best fields.
Another important push was the onset of the Little Ice Age, a climatic phenomenon that led to cooler temperatures in the Northern Hemisphere. Although the height of the Little Ice Age was still around the corner, some evidence suggests that temperatures were falling during the thirteenth century. The environmental changes associated with this transition are not fully understood, but people living closest to the San Juan Mountains, to the northeast of Mesa Verde, were affected first. Growing food at these elevations is always difficult because of the short growing season. As the Little Ice Age progressed, farmers probably moved their fields to lower elevations, infringing on the lands of other farmers and pushing people together, thus contributing to the aggregations. Archaeologists identify a corresponding shift in populations toward the south and west toward Mesa Verde and away from higher elevations.
In the face of all these pushes, people in the Mesa Verde area had yet another reason to move into communal villages: the need for greater cooperation. Sharing and cooperation were almost certainly part of early Puebloan life, even for people living in largely independent single-household residences scattered across the landscape. Archaeologists find that even the most isolated residences during the eleventh and twelfth centuries obtained some pottery, and probably food, from some distance away, while major ceremonial events were opportunities for sharing food and crafts. Scholars believe that this cooperation allowed people to contend with a patchy environment in which precipitation and other resources varied across the landscape: if you produce a lot of food one year, you might trade it for pottery made by a distant ally who is having difficulty with cropsand the next year, the flow of goods might go in the opposite direction. But all of this appears to have changed thirteenth century. Although the climate remained as unpredictable as ever between one year and the next, it became much less locally diverse. In a bad year for farming, everyone was equally affected.No longer was it helpful to share widely. Instead, the most sensible thing would be for neighbors to combine efforts to produce as much food as possible, and thus aggregated towns were a sensible arrangement.
 
The word "traumatic" meaning to
Essential
highly stressful
highly unusual
unwise
The word "intense" in the passage is closest in meaning to
strong
questionable
obvious
deliberate
According to paragraph 1, before the thirteenth century the people of southwestern North America lived in households that
shared daily chores with neighboring households
occupied dwellings that were built into the sides of cliffs
were largely free to conduct their lives as they pleased
enforced common standards of behavior and cooperative conduct within their communities
Which of the following best indicates the organization of paragraph 1?
It presents the conditions that caused a change in a population' s living patterns and then explains why those conditions got worse.
It identifies certain present-day cultural traditions and rules and then traces them to their roots in the thirteenth century.
It casts doubt on one explanation of the move to pueblos and then introduces an alternative explanation that the passage will defend.
It describes a major change in a population' s living patterns and then presents a number of problems that resulted from that change.
According to paragraph 3, which of the following was one of the consequences of increasing population densities?
People were increasingly crowded into collections of large housing units.
People stopped planting crops that have relatively low yields.
Domestic buildings were pushed beyond the canyon limits.
The natural landscape was destroyed.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage (paragraph 4)?Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Some scholars even claim that the intensification of farmers' various efforts during the 1200s led to further population growth and the consequent need for more arable land.
Evidence of intensifying agriculture in the 1200s indicates a need to feed a larger population and so extends the argument that a growing population was the cause of the move to pueblos.
During the 1200s, farmers met the demand for more arable land, but they also succeeded in cultivating existing land more intensively with the help of agricultural construction projects.
Some scholars feel strongly that the construction of small dams, reservoirs, terraces, and field houses in the thirteenth century is independent evidence for growth in the number of people.
The word "transition" in the passage is closest in meaning to
change
climate
decline
problem
Why does the author state that "Growing food at these elevations is always difficult because of the short growing season"?
To explain why the higher elevations were always relatively sparsely populated
To suggest that any worsening of conditions would have significant consequences
To emphasize how resourceful the people growing food at these elevations were
To argue that farming was not the primary source of food at high elevations
According to paragraph 4, what did farmers do in response to falling temperatures during the Little Ice Age?
Moved to areas away from Mesa Verde
Moved closer to the northeastern part of Mesa Verde
Began to cultivate crops adapted to a short growing season
Gave up the cultivation of the highest-lying lands
According to paragraph 5, major ceremonial events were occasions for
leaders to persuade people from the countryside to move into a pueblo
farmers to collect information about where crops could be reliably grown
people to develop better techniques for producing pottery and crafts
people in the early Puebloan era to share farm and craft products
According to paragraph 5, which of the following was a reason people in the Mesa Verde area formed communal villages in the thirteenth century?
The climate in the Mesa Verde area became more locally diverse.
Individuals were no longer interested in exchanging pottery and food.
Cooperation between people became more important for survival.
Bad years of farming began to occur more frequently.
Paragraph 5 supports which of the following statements about cooperation among the people in the Mesa Verde area from the eleventh through the thirteenth century?
Cooperation allowed many households to give up farming and to specialize in making pottery and crafts.
People went from exchanging food and crafts they individually produced to sharing in a cooperative effort to produce as much food as possible.
Overtime there was less cooperation as farmers competed with each other for trade with distant areas.
Individuals stopped cooperating with each other because they did not have enough food for themselves.

The city is an extraordinary processor of mass and energy and has its own metabolism. A daily input of water, food, and energy of various kinds is matched by an output of sewage, solid waste, air pollutants, energy, and materials that have been transformed in some way. The quantities involved are enormous. Many aspects of this energy use affect the atmosphere of a city, particularly in the production of heat.
In winter the heat produced by a city can equal or surpass the amount of heat available from the Sun. All the heat that warms a building eventually transfers to the surrounding air, a process that is quickest where houses are poorly insulated. But an automobile produces enough heat to warm an average house in winter, and if a house were perfectly insulated, one adult could also produce more than enough heat to warm it. Therefore, even without any industrial production of heat, an urban area tends to be warmer than the countryside that surrounds it.
The burning of fuel, such as by cars, is not the only source of this increased heat. Two other factors contribute to the higher overall temperature in cities. The first is the heat capacity of the materials that constitute the city, which is typically dominated by concrete and asphalt. During the day, heat from the Sun can be conducted into these materials and storedto be released at night. But in the countryside materials have a significantly lower heat capacity because a vegetative blanket prevents heat from easily flowing into and out of the ground. The second factor is that radiant heat coming into the city from the Sun is trapped in two ways: (1) by a continuing series of reflection among the numerous vertical surfaces that buildings present and (2) by the dust dome, the cloudlike layer of polluted air that most cities produce. Shortwave radiation from the Sun passes through the pollution dome more easily than outgoing longwave radiation does; the latter is absorbed by the gaseous pollutants of the dome and reradiated back to the urban surface.
 Cities, then, are warmer than the surrounding rural areas, and together they produce a phenomenon known as the urban heat island. Heat islands develop best under particular conditions 
associated with light winds, but they can form almost any time. The precise configuration of a heat island depends on several factors. 
For example, the wind can make a heat island stretch in the direction it blows. When a heat island is well developed, 
variations can be extreme; in winter, busy streets in cities can be 1.7 warmer than the side streets. Areas near traffic lights can be similarly warmer than the areas between them because of the effect of cars standing in traffic instead of moving. 
The maximum differences in temperature between neighboring urban and rural environments is called the heat-island intensity for that region. In general, the larger the city, the greater 
its heat-island intensity. The actual level of intensity depends on such factors as the physical layout, population density, and productive activities of a metropolis.                             
The surface-atmosphere relationships inside metropolitan areas produce a number of climatic peculiarities. For one thing, the presence or absence of moisture is affected by the special qualities of the urban surface. With much of the built-up landscape impenetrable by water, even gentle rain runs off almost immediately from rooftops, streets, and parking lots. Thus, city surfaces, as well as the air above them, tend to be drier between episodes of rain; with little water available for the cooling process of evaporation, relative humidities are usually lower. Wind movements are also modified in cities because buildings increase the friction on air flowing around them. This friction tends to slow the speed of winds, making them far less efficient at dispersing pollutants. On the other hand, air turbulence increases because of the effect of skyscrapers on airflow. Rainfall is also increased in cities. The cause appears to be in part greater turbulence in the urban atmosphere as hot air rises from the built-up surface.
 
The word enormous in the paragraph 1 is closest in meaning to
growing
frightening
very large
strictly controlled
The word surpass in the paragraph 2 is closest in meaning to
remain below
be higher than
add to
come close to
According to paragraph 2, how soon heat from a warmed house reaches the outside air greatly affected by
how well the house is heated
how well the house is insulated
how many adults live in the house
how much sunshine the house receives
According to paragraph 3, each of the following contributes to making urban areas warmer than the surrounding countryside EXCEPT
the fuel burned by motor vehicles
the capacity to store heat of the materials used in building a city
the easy flow of heat into the ground in city areas covered by vegetation
the repeated reflection of solar radiation back and forth among buildings
According to paragraph 3, why do materials in the countryside have a lower heat capacity than materials in cities do?
In the countryside the Sun is the only important source of heat.
Construction materials in the city are not as good at keeping buildings warm as they are in the countryside.
In the countryside the solar heat that flows into the ground flows out again quickly.
Countryside vegetation prevents heat from being trapped in the ground.
How is paragraph 3 organized?
It describes two factors that contribute to the increased heat of cities and then provides two causes for the second factor.
It describes two causes discovered in an early analysis of the increased heat of cities.
It describes two factors that contribute to the increased heat of cities and two other factors that work against it.
It describes two well-established causes of the increased heat of cities and other two whose roles are less well understood.
The word configuration in the paragraph 4 is closest in meaning to
location
history
temperature
shape
According to paragraph 4, what can explain the substantial differences in temperature between one area and other within a well-developed heat island?
The overall size of the heat island that includes the two reasons
The intensity of the heat island that includes the two areas
Differences between the two areas in the general level of activity, including traffic
Differences between the two areas in the insulation materials used in construction
Paragraph 4 supports the idea that a citys heat-island intensity would increase if
the city went into an economic decline and lost population
the citys economy shifted from heavy industry to health care and education
there was an upward trend in the average age of the citys residents
repair work on the streets slowed traffic throughout the city
According to paragraph 5, surfaces in the city are generally drier than surfaces in the countryside between periods of rainfall because
in the city gentle rain is much more common than heavy rain
high temperatures in the city speed up the process of evaporation
in the city there are longer periods of dry weather between episodes of rain
rainwater in the city cannot soak into most surfaces and quickly runs off
The word modified in the paragraph 5 is closest in meaning to
changed
blocked
increased
weakened
According to paragraph 5, which of the following is a factor responsible for the greater air turbulence in urban environments?
The high speed of the winds travelling above cities
The greater rainfall totals recorded in cities
Attempts to reduce urban air pollution
The effects of tall buildings on airflow

Raccoons have a vast transcontinental distribution, occurring throughout most of North America and Central America.   They are found from southern Canada all the way to Panama, as well as on islands near coastal areas.  They occur in each of the 49 states of the continental United States.  Although raccoons are native only to the Western Hemisphere, they have been successfully transplanted to other parts of the globe.  
Following a decline to a relatively low population level in the 1930s, raccoons began to prosper following their 1943 breeding season. A rapid population surge continued throughout the 1940s, and high numbers have been sustained ever since. By the late 1980s, the number of raccoons in North America was estimated to be at least 15 to 20 times the number that existed during the 1930s. By now, their numbers have undoubtedly grown even more, as they have continued to expand into new habitats where they were once either rare or absent, such as sandy prairies, deserts, coastal marshes, and mountains. Their spread throughout the Rocky Mountain West is indicative of the fast pace at which they can exploit new environments. Despite significant numbers being harvested and having suffered occasional declines, typically because of disease, the raccoon has consistently maintained high population levels.
Several factors explain the raccoon's dramatic increase in abundance and distribution. First, their success has been partially attributed to the growth of cities, as they often thrive in suburban and even urban settings. Furthermore, they have been deliberately introduced throughout the continent. Within the United States, they are commonly taken from one area to another, both legally and illegally, to restock hunting areas and, presumably, because people simply want them to be part of their local fauna. Their appearance and subsequent flourishing in Utah's Great Salt Lake valley within the last 40 years appears to be from such an introduction. As an example of the ease with which transplanted individuals can succeed, raccoons from Indiana (midwestern United States) have reportedly been able to flourish on islands off the coast of Alaska.
The raccoon's expansion in various areas may also be due to the spread of agriculture. Raccoons have been able to exploit crops, especially corn but also cereal grains, which have become dependable food sources for them. The expansion of agriculture, however, does not necessarily lead to rapid increases in their abundance. Farming in Kansas and eastern Colorado (central and western United States) proceeded rapidly in the 1870s and 1880s, but this was about 50 years before raccoons started to spread out from their major habitat, the wooded river bottomlands. They have also expanded into many areas lacking any agriculture other than grazing and into places without forests or permanent streams.
Prior to Europeans settling and farming the Great Plains Region, raccoons probably were just found along its rivers and streams and in the wooded areas of its southeastern section. With the possible exception of the southern part of the province of Manitoba, their absence was notable throughout Canada. They first became more widely distributed in the southern part of Manitoba, and by the 1940s were abundant throughout its southeastern portion. In the 1950s their population swelled in Canada. The control of coyotes in the prairie region in the 1950s may have been a factor in raccoon expansion. If their numbers are sufficient coyotes might be able to suppress raccoon populations (though little direct evidence supports this notion). By the 1960s the raccoon had become a major predator of the canvasback ducks nesting in southwestern Manitoba.
The extermination of the wolf from most of the contiguous United States may have been a critical factor in the raccoon's expansion and numerical increase. In the eighteenth century, when the wolfs range included almost all of North America, raccoons apparently were abundant only in the deciduous forests of the East, Gulf Coast, and Great Lakes regions, though they also extended into the wooded bottomlands of the Midwest's major rivers. In such areas, their arboreal habits and the presence of hollow den trees should have offered some protection from wolves and other large predators. Even though raccoons may not have been a significant part of their diet, wolves surely would have tried to prey on those exposed in relatively treeless areas.
 
According to paragraph 2, what happened to raccoons in the 1930s?
They had a series of unusually good breading seasons.
They expanded into the Rocky Mountain West.
Their population levels fell.
They were harvest in significant numbers for the first time.
Which of the sentences below best express the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Raccoons are growing more numerous even though they must continue to find new habitats.
Raccoons are now undoubtedly present in areas where they once rare or absent.
Raccoons have found parties, deserts, coastal marshes, and mountains to be excellent habitats to expand into.
The number of raccoons must be even greater today because raccoons have continued to expand into new habitats.
The word "consistently" in the passage is closest in meaning to
typically
predictably
increasingly
reliably
According to paragraph 3, which is true about raccoons in Utah's Great Salt Lake Valley?
They were not easily transplanted there from Indiana.
They were not found there prior to 40 years ago.
They were often restocked because of illegal hunting.
They expanded into that area from nearby suburban and urban settings.
According to paragraph 3, the introduction of raccoons into Utah's Great Salt Lake Valley appears to have been an example of an introduction that was
motivated by a desire to have raccoons among the local wildlife.
illegal
carried out by hunters who wanted more raccoons to hunt.
unsuccessful
All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 3 as helping to explain the raccoon's dramatic increase in abundance and distribution EXCEPT
Raccoons thrive in suburban areas.
Hunting raccoons has become illegal in most areas.
People enjoy having raccoons as part of their environment.
A transplanted raccoon will generally be able to succeed in its new environment.
The word "presumably" in the passage is closest in meaning to
it has been established.
it has been incorrectly stated.
it can be assumed.
it can be demonstrated.
According to paragraph 4, how has the spread of agriculture affected raccoon populations?
The spread of agriculture destroyed some of the raccoon's natural habitats and reduced their populations in Kansas and eastern Colorado.
Because of the availability of corn and other cereal grains as a result of the spread of agriculture.
The spread of agriculture may have contributed to some raccoon expansion but has not always caused raccoon populations to expand.
The spread of agriculture to Kansas and eastern Colorado brought increased raccoon populations in the 1870s and 1880s.
According to paragraph 5, what was true about raccoons before the arrival of European settlers?
They were widely distribute throughout the region.
There were found mostly in areas of open prairie.
They were not found in most of Canada.
They had not yet reached the wooded areas of the southeastern portion of the region.
What can be concluded from the discussion in paragraph 5 about coyotes and raccoons in Manitoba?
In the 1950s both coyotes and raccoons increased their populations.
Coyotes are more difficult to control than raccoons are.
Coyotes and raccoons both tend to prefer regions that have rivers, streams, and wooded areas.
More evidence is needed to determine if controlling coyotes contributed to raccoon expansion in the 1950s.
The word "critical" in the passage is closest in meaning to
predictable
crucial
negative
contributing
According to paragraph 6, during the eighteenth century, raccoons were abundant only in forests and wooded bottomlands of major rivers mainly because those were the only places where raccoons
were relatively safe from conflict with humans.
had little trouble finding sufficient food.
had some protection from wolves.
could find a varied diet or prey.

The mounting evidence for age genes that influence the aging process is by no means conclusive, but it is quite impressive, coming from a variety of independent research from aging in worms and fruit flies to antioxidants and gene repair mechanisms, and human mutations. Still, the connections are circumstantial.
Christopher Wills, professor of biology at the University of California in San Diego, thinks that by 2025 science will likely isolate the mammalian age genes in mice. We share roughly 75 percent of our genes with mice and have much the same body chemistry; this is a strong reason to believe that an age gene found in mice could also be at work in humans. If such genes are located, the next step would be to find out if these age genes have their counterparts in humans. Wills believes that if they are found in humans, they may extend the human life span perhaps to 150 years.
But by 2020, when personalized DNA sequencing becomes widespread, a second tactic may prove fruitful as well. By analyzing populations of healthy individuals in their nineties and beyond, scientists will find it possible to use computers to compare their genetic backgrounds and cross-check for similarities in key genes that are suspected of influencing aging. A combination of studies on the DNA of long-lived animals and on the personalized DNA sequences of elderly individuals may considerably narrow down the search for the age gene.
As yet, none of these methods can prove that we can increase the human life span. Indeed, the only theory with a proven track record of extending the life span of animals is the caloric restriction theory, which states that animals which consume calories just above starvation levels live significantly longer than the average. Although this theory flies in the face of common sense (a well-fed animal is well nourished and healthy, and should have greater resistance to disease and aging), it has held up under repeated testing among a wide range of animals. Scientists have consistently increased the life span of rats and mice in the laboratory by 50 to 100 percent. It is the only laboratory-tested theory of age extension for animals that has held up under decades of careful scrutiny. Why?
Across the animal kingdom, the life span of animals is roughly inversely correlated to the metabolism rate.  The slower their normal metabolism rate, the longer their normal life span.  In 1996, in a study that reduced the calorie intake of 200 monkeys by 30 percent, the monkeys were shown to have a slower metabolism rate, a longer life span, and reduced rates of cancer, heart disease, and diabetes.  We have known for 70 years that if you feed laboratory mice less food, they age slower, they live longer, and they get diseases less frequently. We find that monkeys respond in the same way as rodents and that the same biological changes may be in play here, says George Roth of the National Institute of Aging. 
There is still room for scientific debate on the question why? Ron Hart, a scientist at the National Center for Toxicological Research, believes that the answer may tie in the high body temperature of mammals, and humans in particular. Heat causes pieces of the DNA molecule to split off randomly, and it must be repaired, Hart says. Under calorie restriction, though, the engine runs cooler and theres less damage. Merely reducing caloric intake by 40 percent reduced this form of spontaneous DNA damage almost 24 percent! Furthermore, at a higher internal body temperature, oxygen is being burned at a greater rate, creating more free radicals, which also speed up the aging process. Cooling the body, on the other hand, increases the amount of antioxidants in the body. Hart found a fourfold increase in the enzyme catalase and a threefold increase in superoxide dismutase in animals on a restricted diet. Whats fascinating," Hart concludes, is that reduced food intake is the only experimental paradigm ever found that enhances DNA repair. Hart is so convinced of the importance of this work that in 1993 he began the first systematic studies of caloric restrictions in humans.
 
The word conclusivein the passage is closest in meaning to
clear
independent
usual
final
According to paragraph 1, evidence for age genes has come from research into each of the following EXCEPT
mutations in humans
aging in fruit flies
connections among various genes
the process by which damaged genes get repaired
According to paragraph 2, success at isolating age genes in mice would provide support for the idea that
mice and humans have very similar body chemistry
mice and humans have about 75 percent of their genes in common
aging in mice occurs more rapidly than aging in humans does
age genes are likely to be found in humans
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Although the caloric restriction theory is widely accepted, it is the only theory about extending the life span of animals that has not yet been fully proven.
Research has shown that limiting calorie intake to just above the level needed to survive can increase life expectancy.
Only the caloric restriction theory analyzes the calorie consumption of animals with both average and extended life spans.
Records over the life spans of animals indicate that starvation levels are rare when calories are restricted.
The word scrutinyin the passage is closest in meaning to
planning
repetition
examination
Emphasis
What purpose does paragraph 5 serve in the larger discussion of research into age- related genes?
To explain why the caloric restriction theory has remained believable over the years
To explain why the caloric restriction theory was the only theory of age extension that was tested in laboratories
To explain the process involved in extending the life span of animals
To explain the length of time that research into life span extension has been going on
The discussion in paragraph 6 of Harts theory suggests that
free radicals have a negative influence on the life span of mammals
antioxidants tend to lower the body temperature of some mammals but not others
calorie restriction generally decreases enzyme activity
the high body temperature of mammals reduces the need for further calorie consumption
According to paragraph 6, Hart maintains that extending the life span of mammals can be achieved by
increasing the amount of oxygen burned
reducing internal body temperature
improving the quality of free radicals in the body
increasing the frequency of division in DNA molecules

Ever since European first explored Australia, people have been trying to understand the ancient rock drawings and cavings created by the Aborigines, the original inhabitants of the continent. Early in the nineteenth century, encounters with Aboriginal rock art tended to be infrequent and open to speculative interpretation, but since the late nineteenth century, awareness of the extent and variety of Australian rock art has been growing. In the latter decades of the twentieth century there were intensified efforts to understand and record the abundance of Australian rock art.
The systematic study of this art is a relatively new discipline in Australia. Over the past four decades new discoveries have steadily added to the body of knowledge. The most significant data have come from a concentration on three major questions. First, what is the age of Australian rock art? Second, what is its stylistic organization and is it possible to discern a sequence or a pattern of development between styles? Third, is it possible to interpret accurately the subject matter of ancient rock art, bring to bear all available archaeological techniques and the knowledge of present-day Aboriginal informants? 
The age of Australias rock art is constantly being revised, and earlier datings have been proposed as the result of new discoveries. Currently, reliable scientific evidence dates the earliest creation of art on rock surfaces in Australia to somewhere between 30,000 and 50,000 years ago. This in itself is an almost incomprehensible span of generations, and one that makes Australias rock art the oldest continuous art tradition in the world. 
Although the remarkable antiquity of Australias rock art is now established, the sequences and meanings of its images have been widely debated. Since the mid-1970s, a reasonably stable picture has formed of the organization of Australian rock art. In order to create a sense of structure to this picture, researchers have relied on a distinction that still underlies the forms of much indigenous visual culturea distinction between geometric and figurative elements. Simple geometric repeated patternscircles, concentric circles, and linesconstitute the iconography (characteristic images) of the earliest rock-art sites found across Australia. The frequency with which certain simple motifs appear in these oldest sites has led rock-art researchers to adopt a descriptive termthe Panaramitee stylea label which takes its name from the extensive rock pavements at Panaramitee North in desert South Australia, which are covered with motifs pecked into the surface. Certain features of these engravings lead to the conclusion that they are of great agegeological changes had clearly happened after the designs had been made and local Aboriginal informants, when first questioned about them, seemed to know nothing of their origins. Furthermore, the designs were covered with desert varnish, a glaze that develops on rock surfaces over thousands of years of exposure to the elements. The simple motifs found at Panaramitee are common to many rock-art sites across Australia. Indeed, sites with engravings of geometric shapes are also to be found on the island of Tasmania, which was separated from the mainland of the continent some 10,000 years ago.
In the 1970s when the study of Australian archaeology was in an exciting phase of development, with the great antiquity of rock art becoming clear. Lesley Maynard, the archaeologist who coined the phrase Panaramitee style, suggested that a sequence could be determined for Australian rock art, in which a geometric style gave way to a simple figurative style (outlines of figures and animals), followed by a range of complex figurative styles that, unlike the pan-Australian geometric tradition, tended to be much greater regional diversity. While accepting that this sequence fits the archaeological profile of those sites, which were occupied continuously over many thousands of years a number of writers have warned that the underlying assumption of such a sequencea development from the simple and the geometric to the complex and naturalisticobscures the cultural continuities in Aboriginal Australia, in which geometric symbolism remains fundamentally important. In this context the simplicity of a geometric motif may be more apparent than real. Motifs of seeming simplicity can encode complex meanings in Aboriginal Australia. And has not twentieth-century art shown that naturalism does not necessarily follow abstraction in some kind of predetermine sequence?
 
The word infrequent in the passage (paragraph 1) is closest in meaning to
puzzling
uncommon
questionable
undocumented
According to paragraph 1, the twentieth-century approach to studying Australian rock art was different from earlier approaches because the twentieth-century approach
recognized that many different groups of Aborigines created Australian rock art
concentrated on a limited range of Aboriginal rock art
examined Aboriginal art from an Aboriginal rather than from a European perspective
focused more intensely on understanding and documenting rock art
The word relatively in the passage is closest in meaning to
completely
comparatively
apparently
particularly
The word discern in the passage (paragraph 2) is closest in meaning to
indicate
apply
identify
repeat
The word revised in the passage (paragraph 3) is closest in meaning to
discussed
raised
challenged
changed
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage (paragraph 4)? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave ways or leave out essential information
The oldest rock art sites have simpler motifs than the best known sites of Panaramitee North.
Because motifs primarily associated with the Panaramitee region are common in the oldest sites the term Panaramitee style has become the general term for rock art of this type.
Because the Panaramitee style is so common in the older sites, researchers have described it most extensively.
The motifs carved in the rocky surface of the Panaramitee region make up the oldest form of rock art discovered in Australia.
According to paragraph 4, researchers have organized and structured Australian rock art by distinguishing between which of the following?
Images found at Panaramitee North and images found in other parts of Australia
Images found in a particular type of rock layer and images found in other types of rock layers
Images that have geometric elements and images that have figurative elements
Images that are typically found and image that are rarely found
According to paragraph 4, all of the following are signs of the great age of the Panaramitee engravings EXCEPT:
The engravings consisted of simple animal drawings.
The engravings were covered with a layer of a substance known as desert varnish.
Local Aborigines who were asked knew nothing about the origin of the engravings.
Geologic changes had occurred after the engravings were made.
Why does the author include information about Tasmania in paragraph 4?
To provide evidence that the Panaramitee style is widespread and of great age
To prove that Aboriginal Australians could not have made the carvings in Tasmania
To indicate how researchers have determined how long ago Tasmania separated from the mainland
To illustrate the importance of geometric rock art to tourism in Tasmania
According to paragraph 5, the complex figurative style differs from the geometric style in that the complex figurative style
varies significantly from region to region
is more meaningful
appears on only a few types of rocks
has changed little overtime
According to paragraph 5, Lesley Maynard made which of the following suggestions about Australian rock art?
There were a pattern of human figures being represented in a more complex style than animal figures.
Australian archaeology should concentrate on determining the sequence of styles that led up to the Panaramitee style.
The great antiquity of Australian rock art would probably make it impossible to determine the ages of the various styles found in rock art.
The geometric style of Australian rock art was replaced by increasingly complex figurative styles.
In paragraph 5, the author indicates that twentieth century art has shown that naturalism does not necessarily follow abstraction in some kind of predetermined sequence in order to
emphasize that it may not be possible to determine what the figures in ancient rock art represent
suggest a reply to those who have questioned Maynards interpretation of the sequence of Australian rock art
provide a counterexample to Maynards interpretation of the sequence of Australian rock art
indicate that twentieth century art is more advanced than ancient rock art

Spartina alterniflora, known as cordgrass, is a deciduous, perennial flowering plant native to the Atlantic coast and the Gulf Coast of the United States. It is the dominant native species of the lower salt marshes along these coasts, where it grows in the intertidal zone (the area covered by water some parts of the day and exposed others).
These natural salt marshes are among the most productive habitats in the marine environment. Nutrient-rich water is brought to the wetlands during each high tide, making a high rate of food production possible. As the seaweed and marsh grass leaves die, bacteria break down the plant material, and insects, small shrimplike organisms, fiddler crabs, and marsh snails eat the decaying plant tissue, digest it, and excrete wastes high in nutrients. Numerous insects occupy the marsh, feeding on living or dead cordgrass tissue, and redwing blackbirds, sparrows, rodents, rabbits, and deer feed directly on the cordgrass. Each tidal cycle carries plant material into the offshore water to be used by the subtidal organisms.
Spartina is an exceedingly competitive plant. It spreads primarily by underground stems; colonies form when pieces of the root system or whole plants float into an area and take root or when seeds float into a suitable area and germinate. Spartina establishes itself on substrates ranging from sand and silt to gravel and cobble and is tolerant of salinities ranging from that of near freshwater (0.05 percent) to that of salt water (3.5 percent). Because they lack oxygen, marsh sediments are high in sulfides that are toxic to most plants.  Spartina has the ability to take up sulfides and convert them to sulfate, a form of sulfur that the plant can use; this ability makes it easier for the grass to colonize marsh environments. Another adaptive advantage is Spartinas ability to use carbon dioxide more efficiently than most other plants.
These characteristics make Spartina a valuable component of the estuaries where it occurs naturally. The plant functions as a stabilizer and a sediment trap and as a nursery area for estuarine fish and shellfish. Once established, a stand of Spartina begins to trap sediment, changing the substrate elevation, and eventually the stand evolves into a high marsh system where Spartina is gradually displaced by higher-elevation, brackish-water species. As elevation increases, narrow, deep channels of water form throughout the marsh. Along the east coast Spartina is considered valuable for its ability to prevent erosion and marshland deterioration; it is also used for coastal restoration projects and the creation of new wetland sites.
Spartina was transported to Washington State in packing materials for oysters transplanted from the east coast in 1894. Leaving its insect predators behind, the cordgrass has been spreading slowly and steadily along Washingtons tidal estuaries on the west coast, crowding out the native plants and drastically altering the landscape by trapping sediment. Spartina modifies tidal mudflats, turning them into high marshes inhospitable to the many fish and waterfowl that depend on the mudflats. It is already hampering the oyster harvest and the Dungeness crab fishery, and it interferes with the recreational use of beaches and waterfronts. Spartina has been transplanted to England and to New Zealand for land reclamation and shoreline stabilization. In New Zealand the plant has spread rapidly, changing mudflats with marshy fringes to extensive salt meadows and reducing the number and kinds of birds and animals that use the marsh.
Efforts to control Spartina outside its natural environment have included burning, flooding, shading plants with black canvas or plastic, smothering the plants with dredged materials or clay, applying herbicide, and mowing repeatedly. Little success has been reported in New Zealand and England; Washington States management program has tried many of these methods and is presently using the herbicide glyphosphate to control its spread. Work has begun to determine the feasibility of using insects as biological controls, but effective biological controls are considered years away. Even with a massive effort, it is doubtful that complete eradication of Spartina from nonnative habitats is possible, for it has become an integral part of these shorelines and estuaries during the last 100 to 200 years.
 
According to paragraph 1, each of the following is true of Spartina alrerniflora EXCEPT:
It rarely flowers in salt marshes.
It grows well in intertidal zones.
It is commonly referred to as cordgrass.
It occurs naturally along the Gulf Coast and the Atlantic coast of the United States.
According to paragraph 2, a major reason why natural salt marshes are so productive is that they are
inhabited by long-lived seaweed and marsh grasses that reproduce gradually
kept clear of excess plant material by the tides
regularly supplied with high levels of nutrients
home to a wide variety of different species of grasses
Which of the sentences below best express the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Insects feed only on dead cordgrass, while most other marsh inhabitants feed on live cordgrass.
The marsh is a good habitat for insects, but a relatively poor one for birds and animals.
Although cordgrass provides food for birds and animals, it gives insects both food and a place to live.
Cordgrass provides food for numerous insects, birds, and other animals.
What is the organizational structure of paragraph 3?
It makes a general claim about Spartina and then provides specific evidence to defend that claim against objections to the claim.
It presents a general characterization of Spartina and then describes particular features on which this characterization is based.
It reports a widely held view about Spartina and then considers evidence both for and against that view.
It presents a general hypothesis about Spartina and then lists specific evidence that disputes that hypothesis.
The word "exceedingly" in the passage is closest in meaning to
unusually
dangerously
surprisingly
highly
According to paragraph 3, one reason that Spartina is able to compete in marsh environments so successfully is its ability to
alter the substrate in which it grows
convert sulfides into a usable form of sulfur
grow and produce seeds while floating on the surface of the water
produce carbon dioxide with great efficiency
Paragraph 4 suggests that where Spartina occurs naturally, an established stand of it will eventually
create conditions in which it can no longer survive
get washed away by water flowing through the deep channels that form around it
become adapted to brackish water
take over other grass species growing in the area
According to paragraph 4, in its natural habitats, Spartina helps estuaries by
controlling marshland decline
decreasing the substrate elevation
reducing the brackishness of the water
increasing the flow of water into the estuary
According to paragraph 5, Spartina negatively affects wildlife in estuaries by
trapping fish and waterfowl in sediment
preventing oysters from transplanting successfully
turning mudflats into high marshes and salt meadows
expanding the marshy fringes of salt meadows
The word "modifies" in the passage is closest in meaning to
creates
changes
grows on
breaks down
According to paragraph 6, each of the following methods has been used in attempts to control Spartina EXCEPT
flooding plants
cutting plants down repeatedly
applying herbicides
introducing predatory insects
The word "Efforts" in the passage is closest in meaning to
Laws
Suggestions
Attempts
Failures

Perceptions of the visible world were greatly altered by the invention of photography in the middle of the nineteenth century. In particular, and quite logically, the art of painting was forever changed, though not always in the ways one might have expected. The realistic and naturalistic painters of the mid- and late-nineteenth century were all intently aware of photographyas a thing to use, to learn from, and react to.
Unlike most major inventions, photography had been long and impatiently awaited. The images produced by the camera obscura, a boxlike device that used a pinhole or lens to throw an image onto a ground-glass screen or a piece of white paper, were already familiarthe device had been much employed by topographical artists like the Italian painter Canaletto in his detailed views of the city of Venice. What was lacking was a way of giving such images permanent form. This was finally achieved by Louis Daguerre (1787-1851), who perfected a way of fixing them on a silvered copper plate. His discovery, the "daguerreotype," was announced in 1839. 
A second and very different process was patented by the British inventor William Henry Talbot (1800-1877) in 1841.  Talbot's "calotype" was the first negative-to-positive process and the direct ancestor of the modern photograph. The calotype was revolutionary in its use of chemically treated paper in which areas hit by light became dark in tone, producing a negative image.  This "negative," as Talbot called it, could then be used to print multiple positive images on another piece of treated paper. 
The two processes produced very different results. The daguerreotype was a unique image that reproduced what was in front of the camera lens in minute, unselective detail and could not be duplicated. The calotype could be made in series, and was thus the equivalent of an etching or an engraving. Its general effect was soft edged and tonal.
One of the things that most impressed the original audience for photography was the idea of authenticity. Nature now seemed able to speak for itself, with a minimum of interference. The title Talbot chose for his book, The Pencil of Nature (the first part of which was published in 1844), reflected this feeling. Artists were fascinated by photography because it offered a way of examining the world in much greater detail. They were also afraid of it, because it seemed likely to make their own efforts unnecessary.
Photography did indeed make certain kinds of painting obsoletethe daguerreotype virtually did away with the portrait miniature. It also made the whole business of making and owning images democratic. Portraiture, once a luxury for the privileged few, was suddenly well within the reach of many more people.
In the long term, photography's impact on the visual arts was far from simple. Because the medium was so prolific, in the sense that it was possible to produce a multitude of images very cheaply, it was soon treated as the poor relation of fine art, rather than its destined successor. Even those artists who were most dependent on photography became reluctant to admit that they made use of it, in case this compromised their professional standing.
The rapid technical development of photographythe introduction of lighter and simpler equipment, and of new emulsions that coated photographic plates, film, and paper and enabled images to be made at much faster speedshad some unanticipated consequences. Scientific experiments made by photographers such as Eadweard Muybridge (1830-1904) and Etienne-Jules Marey (1830-1904) demonstrated that the movements of both humans and animals differed widely from the way they had been traditionally represented in art. Artists, often reluctantly, were forced to accept the evidence provided by the camera. The new candid photographyunposed pictures that were made when the subjects were unaware that their pictures were being takenconfirmed these scientific results, and at the same time, thanks to the radical cropping (trimming) of images that the camera often imposed, suggested new compositional formats. The accidental effects obtained by candid photographers were soon being copied by artists such as the French painter Degas.
 
What can be inferred from paragraphs 1 and 2 about the effect of photography on nineteenth-century painting?
Photography did not significantly change the way people looked at reality.
Most painters used the images of the camera obscura in preference to those of the daguerreotype.
Painters who were concerned with realistic or naturalistic representation were particularly influenced by photography.
Artists used the long-awaited invention of photography in just the ways they had expected to.
According to paragraphs 2 and 3 which of the following did the daguerreotype and the calotype have in common?
They were equally useful for artists.
They could be reproduced.
They produced a permanent image
They were produced on treated paper.
The word "duplicated" in the passage is closest in meaning to
copied
replaced
handled
clarified
The phrase "Its general effect" in the passage refers to
the camera lens
the calotype
the etching
the engraving
The word "authenticity" in the passage is closest in meaning to
improvement
practicality
genuineness
repetition
What point does the author make in paragraph 6?
Paintings became less expensive because of competition with photography.
Photography, unlike painting, was a type of portraiture that even ordinary people could afford.
Every style of painting was influenced by the invention of photography.
The daguerreotype was more popular than the calotype.
The word "reluctant" in the passage is closest in meaning to
unable
embarrassed
unlikely
unwilling
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Photography did not replace other fine arts because people felt the image looked cheap in relation to the other arts.
Photography was not considered a true art because people could use it to create many images cheaply.
Photography was so cheap and readily available that it could be purchased by people who were too poor to purchase fine art.
Photography not only spread quickly but also was a cheap art form and so became true successor of fine arts rather than its poor relation.
The word "unanticipated" in the passage is closest in meaning to
indirect
not expected
unquestionable
beneficial
The word "accidental" in the passage is closest in meaning to
surprising
unintentional
realistic
unusual
Which of the following is mentioned in paragraph 8 as a benefit that artists derived from photography?
It inspired artists to use technological themes in their painting.
It lent prestige to those artists who used photographs as models for paintings
It provided artists with new types of equipment to speed up the painting process.
It motivated artists to think about new ways to compose images in their paintings.
It can be inferred from paragraph 8 that one effect that photography had on painting was that it
provided painters with new insights into how humans and animals actually move
showed that representing movement could be as interesting as portrait art
increased the appeal of painted portraiture among the wealthy
influenced artists to improve techniques for painting faster

Sometime after midnight on February 8,1969, a large, bright meteor entered Earth's atmosphere and broke into thousands of pieces, plummeted to the ground, and scattered over an area 50 miles long and 10 miles wide in the state of Chihuahua in Mexico. The first meteorite from this fall was found in the village of Pueblito de Allende. Altogether, roughly two tons of meteorite fragments were recovered, all of which bear the name Allende for the location of the first discovery.
Individual specimens of Allende are covered with a black, glassy crust that formed when their exteriors melted as they were slowed by Earth's atmosphere. When broken open, Allende stones are revealed to contain an assortment of small, distinctive objects, spherical or irregular in shape and embedded in a dark gray matrix (binding material), which were once constituents of the solar nebulathe interstellar cloud of gas and dust out of which our solar system was formed.
The Allende meteorite is classified as a chondrite. Chondrites take their name from the Greek word chondrosmeaning "seed"an allusion to their appearance as rocks containing tiny seeds. These seeds are actually chondrules: millimeter-sized melted droplets of silicate material that were cooled into spheres of glass and crystal. A few chondrules contain grains that survived the melting event, so these enigmatic chondrules must have formed when compact masses of nebular dust were fused at high temperaturesapproaching 1,700 degrees Celsiusand then cooled before these surviving grains could melt. Study of the textures of chondrules confirms that they cooled rather quickly, in times measured in minutes or hours, so the heating events that formed them must have been localized. It seems very unlikely that large portions of the nebula were heated to such extreme temperatures, and huge nebula areas could not possibly have lost heat so fast. Chondrules must have been melted in small pockets of the nebula that were able to lose heat rapidly. The origin of these peculiar glassy spheres remains an enigma.
Equally perplexing constituents of Allende are the refractory inclusions: irregular white masses that tend to be larger than chondrules. They are composed of minerals uncommon on Earth, all rich in calcium, aluminum, and titanium, the most refractory (resistant to melting) of the major elements in the nebula. The same minerals that occur in refractory inclusions are believed to be the earliest-formed substances to have condensed out of the solar nebula. However, studies of the textures of inclusions reveal that the order in which the minerals appeared in the inclusions varies from inclusion to inclusion, and often does not match the theoretical condensation sequence for those metals. 
Chondrules and inclusions in Allende are held together by the chondrite matrix, a mixture of fine-grained, mostly silicate minerals that also includes grains of iron metal and iron sulfide. At one time it was thought that these matrix grains might be pristine nebular dust, the sort of stuff from which chondrules and inclusions were made. However, detailed studies of the chondrite matrix suggest that much of it, too, has been formed by condensation or melting in the nebula, although minute amounts of surviving interstellar dust are mixed with the processed materials.
All these diverse constituents are aggregated together to form chondritic meteorites, like Allende, that have chemical compositions much like that of the Sun. To compare the compositions of a meteorite and the Sun, it is necessary that we use ratios of elements rather than simply the abundances of atoms. After all, the Sun has many more atoms of any element, say iron, than does a meteorite specimen, but the ratios of iron to silicon in the two kinds of matter might be comparable. The compositional similarity is striking. The major difference is that Allende is depleted in the most volatile elements, like hydrogen, carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, and the noble gases, relative to the Sun. These are the elements that tend to form gases even at very low temperatures. We might think of chondrites as samples of distilled Sun, a sort of solar sludge from which only gases have been removed. Since practically all the solar system's mass resides in the Sun, this similarity in chemistry means that chondrites have average solar system composition, except for the most volatile elements; they are truly lumps of nebular matter, probably similar in composition to the matter from which planets were assembled.
 
The word "location" in the passage is closest in meaning to
sight
sake
success
place
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 1 about the large meteor that entered Earths atmosphere on February 8, 1969?
It was almost ten miles wide.
It was the biggest meteor ever to hit Mexico.
It weighed more than two tons.
It broke into more pieces than most meteors do.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Allende meteorites were formed when constituents of the interstellar cloud of gas and dust got trapped inside small, roughly spherical objects and these objects became bound together in a dark gray matrix.
Inside Allende meteorites is a dark gray matrix that binds together small spherical or irregular objects formed from the interstellar cloud of gas and dust out of which the solar system was made.
By breaking open Allende meteorites, scientists were able to find out what the solar nebula was made of.
Allende meteorites were filled with material formed almost entirelyfrom interstellar gas and dust.
The word "allusion" in the passage is closest in meaning to
addition
modification
resemblance
reference
The word "enigmatic" in the passage is closest in meaning to
dangerous
mysterious
interesting
surprising
According to paragraph 3, what does the presence of grains inside some of the chondrules indicate?
The chondrules were formed of silicate material.
The chondrules were formed at high temperatures and then cooled rapidly.
The grains were formed in huge areas of the solar nebula
The grains were formed after the chondrules were fused together into chondrites.
According to paragraph 4, all of the following are true about the minerals found in the refractory inclusions EXCEPT:
These minerals are among the most resistant to melting of all the major elements in the solar nebula.
These minerals are believed to be some of the first elements to have condensed out of the solar nebula.
These minerals are among the least commonly found elements on Earth.
These elements occur in the order that scientists would have predicted.
The word "pristine" in the passage is closest in meaning to
pure
solid
ordinary
trapped
According to paragraph 5, which of the following is indicated by studies of the mixture holding the inclusions together?
Large amounts of this material were formed by condensation or melting in the nebula.
This material contains more iron and iron sulfide than had previously been thought.
This material is very similar to the material from which the refractory inclusions are made
The grains in this material are made from the same elements as chondrules are.
In paragraph 6, why does the author mention that "the Sun has many more atoms of any element, say iron, than does a meteorite specimen"?
To show how difficult it is to compare the composition of a meteorite with that of the Sun
To explain why a comparison of the compositions of a meteorite and of the Sun has to be done in terms of ratios of elements
To identify the most common element in both the Sun and meteorite specimens
To emphasize how much largerthe Sun is than any meteorite specimen is
According to paragraph 6, the composition of chondritic meteorites differs from the composition of the Sun primarily in
containing nebular matter
containing many fewer atoms of iron
the relative amount of volatile elements
the ratio of iron to silicon
According to paragraph 6, what is the significance of the similarity in composition between chondrites and the Sun?
It indicates what the matter from which planets were formed was probably like.
It may explain howthe Sun originally developed.
It helps scientists estimate the variations in the chemical composition of different meteors.
It suggests that most meteorites may contain large quantities of volatile elements.

Earth's internal heat, fueled by radioactivity, provides the energy for plate tectonics and continental drift, mountain building, and earthquakes. It can also be harnessed to drive electric generators and heat homes. Geothermal energy becomes available in a practical form when underground heat is transferred by water that is heated as it passes through a subsurface region of hot rocks (a heat reservoir) that may be hundreds or thousands of feet deep. The water is usually naturally occurring groundwater that seeps down along fractures in the rock; less typically, the water is artificially introduced by being pumped down from the surface. The water is brought to the surface, as a liquid or steam, through holes drilled for the purpose. 
By far the most abundant form of geothermal energy occurs at the relatively low temperatures of 80 to 180 centigrade. Water circulated through heat reservoirs in this temperature range is able to extract enough heat to warm residential, commercial, and industrial spaces. More than 20,000 apartments in France are now heated by warm underground water drawn from a heat reservoir in a geologic structure near Paris called the Paris Basin. Iceland sits on a volcanic structure known as the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. Reykjavik, the capital of Iceland, is entirely heated by geothermal energy derived from volcanic heat.
Geothermal reservoirs with temperatures above 180 centigrade are useful for generating electricity. They occur primarily in regions of recent volcanic activity as hot, dry rock; natural hot water; or natural steam. The latter two sources are limited to those few areas where surface water seeps down through underground faults or fractures to reach deep rocks heated by the recent activity of molten rock material. The world's largest supply of natural steam occurs at The Geysers, 120 kilometers north of San Francisco, California. In the 1990s enough electricity to meet about half the needs of San Francisco was being generated there. This facility was then in its third decade of production and was beginning to show signs of decline, perhaps because of over development. By the late 1990s some 70 geothermal electric-generating plants were in operation in California, Utah, Nevada, and Hawaii, generating enough power to supply about a million people. Eighteen countries now generate electricity using geothermal heat.
Extracting heat from very hot, dry rocks presents a more difficult problem: the rocks must be fractured to permit the circulation of water, and the water must be provided artificially. The rocks are fractured by water pumped down at very high pressures. Experiments are under way to develop technologies for exploiting this resource.
Like most other energy sources, geothermal energy presents some environmental problems. The surface of the ground can sink if hot groundwater is withdrawn without being replaced. In addition, water heated geothermally can contain salts and toxic materials dissolved from the hot rock. These waters present a disposal problem if they are not returned to the ground from which they were removed.
The contribution of geothermal energy to the world's energy future is difficult to estimate. Geothermal energy is in a sense not renewable, because in most cases the heat would be drawn out of a reservoir much more rapidly than it would be replaced by the very slow geological processes by which heat flows through solid rock into a heat reservoir. However, in many places (for example, California, Hawaii, the Philippines, Japan, Mexico, the rift valleys of Africa)the resource is potentially so large that its future will depend on the economics of production. At present, we can make efficient use of only naturally occurring hot water or steam deposits. Although the potential is enormous, it is likely that in the near future geothermal energy can make important local contributions only where the resource is close to the user and the economics are favorable, as they are in California, New Zealand, and Iceland. Geothermal energy probably will not make large-scale contributions to the world energy budget until well into the twenty-first century, if ever.
 
According to the processes described in paragraph 1, what is the relationship between radioactivity and the steam produced by geothermal heat?
Geothermally heated steam is produced when water is exposed to radioactivity deep underground.
When water is introduced into holes drilled thousands of feet in the ground, it becomes radioactive and turns to steam.
Radioactivity heats Earth's interior rock, which in turn can heat water to the point it becomes steam.
When a reservoir of steam in subsurface rock is produced by radioactivity, it is said to be geothermally heated.
The word "practical" in the passage is closest in meaning to
usable
plentiful
economical
familiar
The word "abundant" in the passage is closest in meaning to
economical
familiar
plentiful
useful
According to paragraph 2, which of the following is true about heat reservoirs with a temperature in the range of 80 to 180 centigrade?
They are under international control.
They are more common than reservoirs that have a higher temperature.
Few of them produce enough heat to warm large industrial spaces.
They are used to generate electricity.
According to paragraph 3, what is the connection between underground faults and naturally occurring steam?
Underground faults enable the heat from molten-rock material to escape upward to regions where it can heat surface water enough to produce steam.
Underground faults are created by steam that is produced in geothermal reservoirs deep inside Earth.
Underground faults create spaces in which natural steam is sometimes trapped.
Underground faults allow surface water to reach deep rocks that are hot enough to turn it into steam.
In paragraph 3, why does the author mention that in the 1990s The Geysers was in its third decade of production?
To provide the historical context of the geothermal production of electricity in the United States
To imply that The Geysers was the first geothermal site to be put into production in California
To help explain the signs of decline shown by The Geysers
To explain why 70 new geothermal sites were put into electricity production in the late 1990s
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraphs 2 and 3 about geothermal reservoirs?
Volcanic heat is associated only with geothermal reservoirs that have a temperature over 180 centigrade.
More countries produce power from geothermal reservoirs than use them for heating buildings.
Most geothermal reservoirs are suitable for producing electricity.
A higher geothermal reservoir temperature is needed to generate electricity than is needed to heat homes.
According to paragraph 4, extracting heat from very hot, dry rocks is difficult in part because
the underground rock must be fractured before heat can be removed from it
the water above the rock is under very high pressure
the rock breaks apart when water is pumped into it
the water circulated through the rock must be much cooler than the rock itself
The word "exploiting" in the passage is closest in meaning to
locating
increasing
making use of
estimating the size of
How is the problem that the surface may sink related to the problem that water heated geothermally may contain toxic materials?
Both problems could be solved by returning groundwater that is removed from an underground heat reservoir back to the reservoir after heat is extracted from it.
The problem of sinking is more difficult to solve than is the problem of toxic materials.
Land at the surface sinks because the rock beneath the surface is weakened when salts and toxic materials are removed from it in the process of extracting geothermal energy.
Both problems are caused by the fact that the hot groundwater in a heat reservoir dissolves the rock, which weakens the rock and makes the water toxic with salt.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Heat flows through solid rock very slowly, so it takes a very long time for geological processes to produce a reservoir of geothermal energy.
Geothermal energy is not renewable because heat flows very slowly through solid rock into or out of a heat reservoir.
The heat quickly removed from a heat reservoir is replaced so slowly by geological processes that geothermal energy is not practically speaking, renewable.
In most cases, heat travels into a heat reservoir so slowfy that it is a much quicker process to remove the heat from a reservoir than to replace it.
In paragraph 6, the author implies that in California, Hawaii, the Philippines, Japan, Mexico, and the rift valleys of Africa the potential size of the geothermal resource is so large that
it might be economically worth developing these sites even though geothermal energy is not renewable
these sites will be the first geothermal energy sites to be developed with new technology
these sites are likely to make a large-scale contribution to the world energy budget in the twenty-first century
it does not matter whether they have naturally occurring deposits of hot water or steam

How did it come about that farming developed independently in a number of world centers (the Southeast Asian mainland, Southwest Asia, Central America, lowland and highland South America, and equatorial Africa) at more or less the same time? Agriculture developed slowly among populations that had an extensive knowledge of plants and animals.  Changing from hunting and gathering to agriculture had no immediate advantages. To start with, it forced the population to abandon the nomad's life and became sedentary, to develop methods of storage and, often, systems of irrigation. While hunter-gatherers always had the option of moving elsewhere when the resources were exhausted, this became more difficult with farming.  Furthermore, as the archaeological record shows, the state of health of agriculturalists was worse than that of their contemporary hunter-gatherers.
Traditionally, it was believed that the transition to agriculture was the result of a worldwide population crisis. It was argued that once hunter-gatherers had occupied the whole world, the population started to grow everywhere and food became scarce; agriculture would have been a solution to this problem. We know, however, that contemporary hunter-gatherer societies control their population in a variety of ways. The idea of a world population crisis is therefore unlikely, although population pressure might have arisen in some areas.
Climatic changes at the end of the glacial period 13,000 years ago have been proposed to account for the emergence of farming. The temperature increased dramatically in a short period of time (years rather than centuries), allowing for a growth of the hunting-gathering population due to the abundance of resources. There were, however, fluctuations in the climatic conditions, with the consequences that wet conditions were followed by dry ones, so that the availability of plants and animals oscillated brusquely.
It would appear that the instability of the climatic conditions led populations that had originally been nomadic to settle down and develop a sedentary style of life, which led in turn to population growth and to the need to increase the amount of food available. Farming originated in these conditions. Later on, it became very difficult to change because of the significant expansion of these populations. It could be argued, however, that these conditions are not sufficient to explain the origins of agriculture. Earth had experienced previous periods of climatic change, and yet agriculture had not been developed.
It is archaeologist Steven Mithen's thesis, brilliantly developed in his book The Prehistory of the Mind (1996), that approximately 40,000 years ago the human mind developed cognitive fluidity, that is, the integration of the specializations of the mind: technical, natural history (geared to understanding the behavior and distribution of natural resources), social intelligence, and the linguistic capacity. Cognitive fluidity explains the appearance of art, religion, and sophisticated speech. Once humans possessed such a mind, they were able to find an imaginative solution to a situation of severe economic crisis such as the farming dilemma described earlier. Mithen proposes the existence of four mental elements to account for the emergence of farming: (1) the ability to develop tools that could be used intensively to harvest and process plant resources; (2) the tendency to use plants and animals as the medium to acquire social prestige and power; (3) the tendency to develop "social relationships" with animals structurally similar to those developed with peoplespecifically, the ability to think of animals as people (anthropomorphism) and of people as animals (totemism); and (4) the tendency to manipulate plants and animals.
The fact that some societies domesticated animals and plants, discovered the use of metal tools, became literate, and developed a state should not make us forget that others developed pastoralism or horticulture (vegetable gardening) but remained illiterate and at low levels of productivity; a few entered the modern period as hunting and gathering societies. It is anthropologically important to inquire into the conditions that made some societies adopt agriculture while others remained hunter-gatherers or horticulturalists. However, it should be kept in mind that many societies that knew of agriculture more or less consciously avoided it. Whether Mithen's explanation is satisfactory is open to contention, and some authors have recently emphasized the importance of other factors.
 
The word "option" in the passage is closest in meaning to
choice
benefit
idea
experience
According to paragraph 1, all of the following are advantages of hunting and gathering over agriculture EXCEPT:
It is a healthier lifestyle.
It requires less knowledge of plants and animals.
It does not need storage capabilities.
It is not tied to any specific location.
The word "therefore" in the passage is closest in meaning to
in theory
obviously
frequently
as a result
Which of the following best describes the way paragraph 2 is organized?
A possible explanation for a phenomenon is presented and then criticized
Two similar ways of accounting for a puzzling fact are considered.
Early societies' response to a problem is contrasted with contemporary societies' response.
A prehistoric development is first explained in traditional terms and then in contemporary terms.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
The resources needed by the growing hunting and gathering population increased rapidly once temperatures rose.
Dramatic temperature increases and the simultaneous growth of the hunting and gathering population led to the need for more resources.
Higher temperatures led to the existence of increased resources, thus enabling the hunting and gathering population to grow.
The dramatic temperature increase occurred during the few years when abundant resources allowed the hunting and gathering population to grow.
According to paragraph 3, the abundance of resources fluctuated sharply after the end of the glacial period because
locally abundant resources were quickly exhausted by hunter-gatherers
the temperature became much higher in some areas over others
different types of plants and animals became available as the climate changed
the amount of rainfall varied radically from one period to the next
It can be inferred from paragraph 4 that it was difficult for people to change from farming back to hunting and gathering because
people had become more used to different types of food
climatic conditions were no longer favorable for hunting and gathering
populations had become too large to be supported by hunting and gathering
the farmer's sedentary life was easier than the hunter-gatherer's nomadic life
Why does the author state that "Earth had experienced previous periods of climatic change, and yet agriculture had not been developed"?
To suggest that climate change had occurred long before the development of agriculture
To argue that climate change does not properly explain why agriculture developed
To challenge the assumption that agriculture developed only in some parts of the world
To question the claim that climate change occurred at the time when agriculture developed
The word "imaginative" in the passage is closest in meaning to
complex
creative
immediate
reliable
According to paragraph 5, Steven Mithen believes that all of the following contributed to the emergence of farming EXCEPT
the development of a mind flexible enough to come up with solutions to complex problems
the tendency to use plants and animals to acquire power
the tendency to emphasize the differences between animals and people
the ability to make tools that could be used for the large-scale harvesting of plants
The word "contention" in the passage is closest in meaning to
investigation
improvement
debate
interpretation
According to paragraph 6, which of the following is a weakness of Mithen
It does not clearly distinguish agriculture from pastoralism and horticulture.
It fails to explain why some societies adopted agriculture while others did not.
It explains the domestication of plants and animals but not the development of metal tools.
It overlooks the fact that illiteracy and low productivity remain problems even today

 Think back to your childhood and try to identify your earliest memory. How old were you?  Most people are not able to recount memories for experiences prior to the age of three years,
a phenomenon called infantile amnesia.  The question of why infantile amnesia occurs has intrigued psychologists for decades, especially in light of ample evidence that infants and young 
children can display impressive memory capabilities.  Many find that understanding the general nature of autobiographical memory, that is, memory for events that have occurred in one's own life,
can provide some important clues to this mystery.  Between ages three and four, children begin to give fairly lengthy and cohesive descriptions of events in their past.
What factors are responsible for this developmental turning point?                             
Perhaps the explanation goes back to some ideas raised by influential Swiss psychologist Jean Piagetnamely, that children under age two years represent events in a qualitatively different form than older children do. According to this line of thought, the verbal abilities that blossom in the two year old allow events to be coded in a form radically different from the action-based codes of the infant. Verbal abilities of one year olds are, in fact, related to their memories for events one year later. When researchers had one year olds imitate an action sequence one year after they first saw it, there was correlation between the children's verbal skills at the time they first saw the event and their success on the later memory task. However, even children with low verbal skills showed evidence of remembering the event; thus, memories may be facilitated by but are not dependent on those verbal skills.
Another suggestion is that before children can talk about past events in their lives, they need to have a reasonable understanding of the self as a psychological entity. The development of an understanding of the self becomes evident between the first and second years of life and shows rapid elaboration in subsequent years. The realization that the physical self has continuity in time, according to this hypothesis, lays the foundation for the emergence of autobiographical memory.
A third possibility is that children will not be able to tell their own "life story" until they understand something about the general form stories take, that is, the structure of narratives. Knowledge about narratives arises from social interactions, particularly the storytelling that children experience from parents and the attempts parents make to talk with children about past events in their lives. When parents talk with children about "what we did today" or "last week" or "last year," they guide the children's formation of a framework for talking about the past. They also provide children with reminders about the memory and relay the message that memories are valued as part of the cultural experience. It is interesting to note that some studies show Caucasian American children have earlier childhood memories than Korean children do. Furthermore, other studies show that Caucasian American mother-child pairs talk about past events three times more often than do Korean mother-child pairs. Thus, the types of social  experiences children have do factor into the development of autobiographical memories.
A final suggestion is that children must begin to develop a "theory of mind"an awareness of the concept of mental states (feelings, desires, beliefs, and thoughts), their own and those of othersbefore they can talk about their own past memories. Once children become capable of answering such questions as "What does it mean to remember?" and "What does it mean to know something?" improvements in memory seem to occur.
It may be that the developments just described are intertwined with and influence one another. Talking with parents about the past may enhance the development of the self-concept, for example, as well as help the child understand what it means to "remember." No doubt the ability to talk about one's past represents memory of a different level of complexity than simple recognition or recall.
 
The word "ample" in the passage is closest in meaning to
surprising
convincing
plentiful
questionable
According to paragraph 1, infantile amnesia has intrigued psychologists because
the ability to recount memories prior to three years of age seems to be connected to intelligence in adulthood
psychologists do not understand why some people are able to recount memories from before the age of three years, while others are not able do so
psychologists do not understand the connection between infantile amnesia and autobiographical memory
although psychologists have evidence that infants have memory abilities, most people cannot remember life events that happened before the age of three years
According to paragraph 1, what is the evidence that a child has developed autobiographical memory?
The child is able to remember past events from before the age of three years.
The child is able to describe past events in a sufficiently lengthy and cohesive manner.
The child is aware that he or she does not remember experiences from before the age of three years.
The child is able to give a basic description of the nature of autobiographical memory.
In paragraph 2, why does the author provide the information that children with low verbal skills showed evidence of remembering a past event?
To provide evidence that memories do not depend only upon verbal skills
To challenge the idea that one year olds are too young to form memories
To argue that the memory of one year olds depends only on action-based codes
To suggest that Piaget later revised his findings on the correlation between memory and verbal ability
The word "reasonable" in the passage is closest in meaning to
consistent
sufficient
apparent
deep
The word "elaboration" in the passage is closest in meaning to
development
specialization
use
transformation
According to paragraph 3, what is the relationship between autobiographical memory and the development of an understanding of the self?
Autobiographical memory aids in the development of an understanding of the self.
Children possess an understanding of the self when they can talk about past events in their lives.
The realization that the self continues through time may aid in the onset of autobiographical memory.
The development of autobiographical memory helps children gain an understanding of their roles in their social relationships.
All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 4 as ways in which parents help their children understand the structure of narratives EXCEPT
talking with their children about past events
telling stories to their children
having their children repeat stories back to them
showing their children that they think memories are important
According to paragraph 4, the studies of Caucasian American and Korean children suggest which of the following?
Autobiographical memories develop similarly across all cultures.
Parents from different cultures tell their children different kinds of stories about the past.
Children's pleasure in hearing stories varies from culture to culture.
The kinds of interactions children have with their parents affect the development of autobiographical memories.
According to paragraph 5, what evidence is there that a "theory of mind" is a factor in the development of autobiographical memory?
Even children who are not aware of their mental states are still able to talk about past events.
Autobiographical memory decreases when a childs feelings and mental state are upset.
Older children who are unable to achieve awareness of mental states lack autobiographical memory.
Children's memory of past events grows once children can answer questions about what it means to know and remember.
The organization of the passage can best be described as
the presentation of an argument followed by the evidence for and against it
a description of a phenomenon followed by several possible theories about how it develops
the definition of a psychological term followed by a history of its usage
an explanation of a process followed by a discussion of its practical applications
The passage supports which of the following statements about the development of autobiographical memory?
It is unlikely that a single factor is responsible for the development of autobiographical memory.
Jean Piaget was the first psychologist to understand the development of autobiographical memory.
Understanding the development of autobiographical memory will help psychologists eliminate infant amnesia
Understanding what it means to remember is the most important factor in the development of autobiographical memory.

The story of the westward movement of population in the United States is, in the main, the story of the expansion of American agricultureof the development of new areas for the raising of livestock and the cultivation of wheat, corn, tobacco, and cotton. After 1815 improved transportation enabled more and more western farmers to escape a self-sufficient way of life and enter a national market economy. During periods when commodity prices were high, the rate of westward migration increased spectacularly. "Old America seemed to be breaking up and moving westward," observed an English visitor in 1817,during the first great wave of migration. Emigration to the West reached a peak in the 1830's. Whereas in 1810 only a seventh of the American people lived west of the Appalachian Mountains, by 1840 more than a third lived there.
Why were these hundreds of thousands of settlersmost of them farmers, some of them artisansdrawn away from the cleared fields and established cities and villages of the East? Certain characteristics of American society help to explain this remarkable migration. The European ancestors of some Americans had for centuries lived rooted to the same village or piece of land until some religious, political, or economic crisis uprooted them and drove them across the Atlantic. Many of those who experienced this sharp break thereafter lacked the ties that had bound them and their ancestors to a single place. Moreover, European society was relatively stratified; occupation and social status were inherited. In American society, however, the class structure was less rigid; some people changed occupations easily and believed it was their duty to improve their social and economic position. As a result, many Americans were an inveterately restless, rootless, and ambitious people. Therefore, these social traits helped to produce the nomadic and daring settlers who kept pushing westward beyond the fringes of settlement. In addition, there were other immigrants who migrated west in search of new homes, material success, and better lives.
The West had plenty of attractions: the alluvial river bottoms, the fecund soils of the rolling forest lands, the black loams of the prairies were tempting to New England farmers working their rocky, sterile land and to southeastern farmers plagued with soil depletion and erosion. In 1820 under a new land law, a farm could be bought for $100. The continued proliferation of banks made it easier for those without cash to negotiate loans in paper money. Western Farmers borrowed with the confident expectation that the expanding economy would keep farm prices high, thus making it easy to repay loans when they fell due.
 Transportation was becoming less of a problem for those who wished to move west and for those who had farm surpluses to send to market.
  Prior to 1815, western farmers who did not live on navigable waterways were connected to them only by dirt roads and mountain trails.  Livestock could be driven across the mountains, but the cost of transporting bulky grains in this fashion was several times greater than their value in eastern markets.
  The first step toward an improvement of western transportation was the construction of turnpikes.  These roads made possible a reduction in transportation costs and thus stimulated the 
commercialization of agriculture along their routes.                             
Two other developments presaged the end of the era of turnpikes and started a transportation revolution that resulted in increased regional specialization and the growth of a national market economy. First came the steamboat; although flatboats and keelboats continued to be important until the 1850s steamboats eventually superseded all other craft in the carrying of passengers and freight. Steamboats were not only faster but also transported upriver freight for about one tenth of what it had previously cost on hand-propelled keelboats. Next came the Erie Canal, an enormous project in its day, spanning about 350 miles. After the canal went into operation, the cost per mile of transporting a ton of freight from Buffalo to New York City declined from nearly 20 cents to less than 1 cent. Eventually, the western states diverted much of their produce from the rivers to the Erie Canal, a shorter route to eastern markets.
 
What can be inferred from paragraph 1 about western farmers prior to 1815?
They had limited their crop production to wheat, corn, tobacco, and cotton.
They were able to sell their produce at high prices.
They had not been successful in raising cattle.
They did not operate in a national market economy.
What is the purpose of the statement, Whereas in 1810 only a seventh of the American people lived west of the Appalachian Mountains, by 1840 more than a third lived there?
To illustrate that generally population shifts occur rapidly
To correct a mistaken impression of American agriculture from 1810 to 1840
To emphasize the range and speed with which the westward migration occurred
O To demonstrated how attractive the Appalachian Mountains were to Americans
The word "fringes" in the passage is closest in meaning to
borders
groups
types
directions
According to paragraph 2, all of the following are reasons why Americans migrated westward EXCEPT
the desire to move from one place to the next
the hope of improving their socioeconomic status
the opportunity to change jobs
the need to escape religious or political crises
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Because the West had more rivers and forests than the East, its soil was more productive.
The fertile soils of the West drew farmers from regions with barren soils.
Farmers living in western areas of the United States were more affected by soil erosion than farmers living in eastern areas.
The soil in western areas of the United States was richer than soil in eastern areas.
According to paragraph 3, what was the significance of the land law passed in 1820?
It granted government-supported loans to farmers.
It provided farmland at an affordable price.
It required banks to offer loans to farmers.
It enabled farmers to sell their land for a profit.
The word "proliferation" in the passage is closest in meaning to
growth
cooperation
importance
success
Paragraph 4 suggests that turnpikes affected farmers by
making the price of grain uniform for both eastern and western farmers
making western farm products more profitable than eastern farm products
allowing farmers to drive their livestock across mountain trails
allowing a greater number of farmers to sell their farm products in a commercial market
The word "superseded" in the passage is closest in meaning to
replaced
reformed
equaled
increased
The word "diverted" in the passage is closest in meaning to
collected
shifted
transported
sold
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 5 about flatboats and keelboats?
They ceased to be used as soon as the first turnpikes were built.
They were slower and more expensive to operate than steamboats.
They were used for long-distance but not for regional transportation.
They were used primarily on the Erie Canal.
Paragraph 5 mentions that the Erie Canal led to a reduction in all of the following EXCEPT
the length of the route that goods from the West traveled across to reach eastern markets
the cost of transporting freight
the price of produce from western states
the amount of produce from western states that was shipped on rivers

The universal global warming at the end of the Ice Age had dramatic effects on temperate regions of Asia, Europe, and North America. Ice sheets retreated and sea levels rose.  The climatic changes in southwestern Asia were more subtle, in that they involved shifts in mountain snow lines, rainfall patterns, and vegetation cover.  However, these same cycles of change had momentous impacts on the sparse human populations of the region.  At the end of the Ice Age, no more than a few thousand foragers lived along the eastern Mediterranean coast, in the Jordan and Euphrates valleys. Within 2,000 years, the human population of the region numbered in the tens of thousands, all as a result of village life and farming.  Thanks to new environmental and archaeological discoveries, we now know something about this remarkable change in local life.
Pollen samples from freshwater lakes in Syria and elsewhere tell us forest cover expanded rapidly at the end of the Ice Age, for the southwestern Asian climate was still cooler and considerably wetter than today. Many areas were richer in animal and plant species than they are now, making them highly favorable for human occupation. About 9000 B.C., most human settlements lay in the area along the Mediterranean coast and in the Zagros Mountains of Iran and their foothills. Some local areas, like the Jordan River valley, the middle Euphrates valley, and some Zagros valleys, were more densely populated than elsewhere. Here more sedentary and more complex societies flourished. These people exploited the landscape intensively, foraging on hill slopes for wild cereal grasses and nuts, while hunting  gazelle and other game on grassy lowlands and in river valleys. Their settlements contain exotic objects such as seashells, stone bowls, and artifacts made of obsidian (volcanic glass), all traded from afar. This considerable volume of intercommunity exchange brought a degree of social complexity in its wake.
Thanks to extremely fine-grained excavation and extensive use of flotation methods (through which seeds are recovered from soil samples), we know a great deal about the foraging practices of the inhabitants of Abu Hureyra in Syria's Euphrates valley. Abu Hureyra was founded about 9500B.C, a small village settlement of cramped pit dwellings (houses dug partially in the soil) with reed roofs supported by wooden uprights. For the next 1,500 years, its inhabitants enjoyed a somewhat warmer and damper climate than today, living in a well-wooded steppe area where wild cereal grasses were abundant. They subsisted off spring migrations of Persian gazelles from the south. With such a favorable location, about 300 to 400 people lived in a sizable, permanent settlement. They were no longer a series of small bands but lived in a large community with more elaborate social organization, probably grouped into clans of people of common descent.
The flotation samples from the excavations allowed botanists to study shifts in plant-collecting habits as if they were looking through a telescope at a changing landscape. Hundreds of tiny plant remains show how the inhabitants exploited nut harvests in nearby pistachio and oak forests. However, as the climate dried up, the forests retreated from the vicinity of the settlement. The inhabitants turned to wild cereal grasses instead, collecting them by the thousands, while the percentage of nuts in the diet fell. By 8200B.C., drought conditions were so severe that the people abandoned their long-established settlement, perhaps dispersing into smaller camps.
Five centuries later, about 7700B.C., a new village rose on the mound. At first the inhabitants still hunted gazelle intensively. Then, about 7000 B.C., within the space of a few generations, they switched abruptly to herding domesticated goats and sheep and to growing einkorn, pulses, and other cereal grasses. Abu Hureyra grew rapidly until it covered nearly 30 acres. It was a close-knit community of rectangular, one-story mud-brick houses, joined by narrow lanes and courtyards, finally abandoned about 5000 B.C.. Many complex factors led to the adoption of the new economies, not only at Abu Hureyra, but at many other locations such as 'Ain Ghazal, also in Syria, where goat toe bones showing the telltale marks of abrasion caused by foot tethering (binding) testify to early herding of domestic stock.
 
The word "momentous" in the passage is closest in meaning to
numerous
regular
very important
very positive
Major climatic changes occurred by the end of the Ice Age in all of the following geographic areas EXCEPT
temperate regions of Asia
southwestern Asia
North America
Europe
The phrase "this remarkable change" in the passage refers to
warming at the end of the Ice Age
shifts in mountain snow lines
the movement of people from farms to villages
a dramatic increase in the population
The word "exploited" in the passage is closest in meaning to
explored
utilized
inhabited
improved
Why does the author mention "seashells, stone bowls, and artifacts made of obsidian"?
To give examples of objects obtained through trade with other societies
To illustrate the kinds of objects that are preserved in a cool climate
To provide evidence that the organization of work was specialized
To give examples of the artistic ability of local populations
The word "cramped" in the passage is closest in meaning to
primitive
secure
extended
confined
Paragraph 3 suggests which of the following about the settlement of Abu Hureyra?
The settlement was inhabited by small groups of people from nearby areas.
Small bands of people migrated in and out of the settlement.
The location of the settlement made permanent development difficult.
The easy availability of food led to the growth of the settlement.
The word "shifts" in the passage is closest in meaning to
effects
similarities
changes
exceptions
Paragraph 4 suggests that the people of Abu Hureyra abandoned their long-established settlement because
the inhabitants had cleared all the trees from the forests
wild cereal grasses took over pistachio and oak forests
people wanted to explore new areas
lack of rain caused food shortages
According to paragraph 5, after 7000 B.C. the settlement of Abu Hureyra differed from earlier settlements at that location in all of the following EXCEPT
the domestication of animals
the intensive hunting of gazelle
the size of the settlement
the design of the dwellings
The word "abruptly" in the passage is closest in meaning to
informally
briefly
suddenly
surprisingly
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
In many areas besides Abu Hureyra, complex factors led to new economies including the herding of domestic stock.
In 'Ain Ghazal and Syria, domestic stock was more important than it was at Abu Hureyra.
Once early methods of herding animals improved, new economies were adopted.
Many complex theories attempt to explain the early domestication of animals.

Genes from virtually any organism, from viruses to humans, can now be inserted into plants, creating what are known as transgenic plants. Now used in agriculture, there are approximately 109 million acres of transgenic crops grown worldwide, 68 percent of which are in the United States. The most common transgenic crops are soybeans, corn, cotton, and canola. Most often, these plants either contain a gene making them resistant to the herbicide glyphosate or they contain an insect-resistant gene that produces a protein called Bt toxin.
On the positive side, proponents of transgenic crops argue that these crops are environmentally friendly because they allow farmers to use fewer and less noxious chemicals for crop production. For example, a 21 percent reduction in the use of insecticide has been reported on Bt cotton (transgenic cotton that produces Bt toxin). In addition, when glyphosate is used to control weeds, other more persistent herbicides do not need to be applied.
On the negative side, opponents of transgenic crops suggest that there are many questions that need to be answered before transgenic crops are grown on a large scale. One question deals with the effects that Bt plants have on nontarget organisms such as beneficial insects, worms, and birds that consume the genetically engineered crop. For example, monarch caterpillars feeding on milkweed plants near Bt cornfields will eat some corn pollen that has fallen on the milkweed leaves. Laboratory studies indicate that caterpillars can die from eating Bt pollen. However, field tests indicate that Bt corn is not likely to harm monarchs. Furthermore, the application of pesticides (the alternative to growing Bt plants) has been demonstrated to cause widespread harm to nontarget insects.
Another unanswered question is whether herbicide-resistant genes will move into the populations of weeds. Crop plants are sometimes grown in areas where weedy relatives also live. If the crop plants hybridize and reproduce with weedy relatives, then this herbicide-resistant gene will be perpetuated in the offspring.   In this way, the resistant gene can make its way into the weed population.   If this happens, a farmer can no longer use glyphosate, for example, to kill those weeds.   This scenario is not likely to occur in many instances because there are no weedy relatives growing near the crop plant.   However, in some cases, it may become a serious problem. For example, canola readily hybridizes with mustard weed species and could transfer its herbicide-resistant genes to those weeds.
We know that evolution will occur when transgenic plants grown on a large scale over a period of time. Of special concern is the development of insect populations resistant to the Bt toxin. This pesticide has been applied to plants for decades without the development of insect-resistant populations. However, transgenic Bt plants express the toxin in all tissues throughout growing season. Therefore, all insects carrying genes that make them susceptible to the toxin will die. That leaves only the genetically resistant insects alive to perpetuate the population. When these resistant insects mate, they will produce a high proportion of offspring capable of surviving in the presence of the Bt toxin. Farmers are attempting to slow the development of insect resistance in Bt crops by, for example, planting nontransgenic border rows to provide a refuge for susceptible insects. These insects may allow Bt susceptibility to remain in the population.
Perhaps the most serious concern about the transgenic crop plants currently in use is that they encourage farmers to move farther away from sustainable agricultural farming practices, meaning ones that allow natural resources to continually regenerate over the long run. Transgenics, at least superficially, simplify farming by reducing the choices made by the manager. Planting a glyphosate-resistant crop commits a farmer to using that herbicide for the reason, probably to the exclusion of all other herbicides and other weed-control practices. Farmers who use Bt transgenics may not feel that they need to follow through with integrated pest-management practices that use beneficial insects and timely applications of pesticides to control insect pests. A more sustainable approach would be to plant nontransgenic corn, monitor the fields throughout the growing season, and then apply a pesticide only if and when needed.
 
According to paragraph 1, which of the following is true of transgenic plants that produce the protein Bt?
They are resistant to certain herbicides.
They grow best in the United States.
They were treated with the chemicals glyphosate.
They are resistant to destruction by insects.
According to paragraph 2, supporters claim that producing transgenic plants enables farmers to
increase crop production by up to 21 percent
use fewer and less toxic chemicals
control weeds without the use of glyphosate
take advantage of more effective herbicides
The word "persistent" in the passage in closest in meaning to
harmful
long lasting
expensive
hard to control
Which of the following can be inferred about monarch caterpillars from paragraph 3?
They often cause damage to corn crops.
They are the only species that is immune to Bt toxin.
They are considered beneficial insects.
Their reactions to Bt pollen have not yet been studied.
What conclusion does the author make in paragraph 3 about the effect of Bt plants on notarget organisms?
Bt toxins do not affect nontarget organisms because the toxins only harm pests that eat the leaves, stems, or fruit of the plants.
Bt plants have been shown in field studies to cause great harm to nontarget organisms.
Bt plants do not cause as much harm to nontarget species as the use of conventional pesticides.
Even if Bt toxins do not affect the insects that feed on the plants, they have harmful effects on birds that eat these insects.
The word "perpetuated" in the passage is closest in meaning to
continued
reproduced
observed
spread
The word "scenario" in the passage is closest in meaning to
effect
problem
resistance
situation
Why does the author mention "mustard weed species" in the discussion of plants that hybridize?
To give an example of a weed that may become resistant to glyphosate due to hybridizing with a transgenic plant.
To argue that creating transgenic plants in the laboratory is not always necessary, as some can be created through hybridizing in the fields.
To provide evidence that competition from related species of plants can be a serious problem for transgenic plants.
To support the claim that it is difficult to determine whether or not a crop plant has been planted a safe distance from weedy relatives.
Paragraph 5 makes all of the following claims about Bt resistance in insect populations EXCEPT
Regular use of Bt pesticides has not created resistant insect populations, so the use of Bt plants is probably safe as well.
The evolution of Bt-resistant insect populations will happen eventually if use of transgenic plants becomes widespread.
Because Bt plants are toxic at all times and in all tissues, they allow only Bt-resistant insects to survive and reproduce.
Planting nontransgenic plants alongside Bt plants may help Bt-susceptible insects to remain part of the population.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
The transgenic crop plants currently in use are probably far behind the transgenic plants of the future in terms of their sustainability.
Farmers who use transgenic crop plants are heading toward practices that allow natural resources to continually regenerate over the long run.
Transgenic crop plants may be used in place of other, more sustainable agricultural practices, and this is perhaps their biggest disadvantage.
Perhaps the most serious concern about the transgenic crop plants currently in use is the possibility that they may not be sustainable over the long run.
According to paragraph 6, a sustainable approach to weed and pest control includes all of the following EXCEPT
watching the fields closely to determine when weeds or pests are actually a problem
applying pesticides unless or until pesticides are needed
using only one type of herbicide throughout the growing season
planting nontransgenic crops
The word "superficially" in the passage is closest in meaning to
in the opinion of experts
at the present moment
when done properly
without deeper analysis

When one considers the many ways by which organisms are completely destroyed after death, it is remarkable that fossils are as common as they are. Attack by scavengers and bacteria, chemical decay, and destruction by erosion and other geologic agencies make the odds against preservation very high. However, the chances of escaping complete destruction are vastly improved if the organism happens to have a mineralized skeleton and dies in a place where it can be quickly buried by sediment. Both of these conditions are often found on the ocean floors, where shelled invertebrates (organisms without spines) flourish and are covered by the continuous rain of sedimentary particles. Although most fossils are found in marine sedimentary rocks, they also are found in terrestrial deposits left by streams and lakes. On occasion, animals and plants have been preserved after becoming immersed in tar or quicksand, trapped in ice or lava flows, or engulfed by rapid falls of volcanic ash.
The term "fossil" often implies petrifaction, literally a transformation into stone. After the death of an organism, the soft tissue is ordinarily consumed by scavengers and bacteria. The empty shell of a snail or clam may be left behind, and if it is sufficiently durable and resistant to dissolution, it may remain basically unchanged for a long period of time. Indeed, unaltered shells of marine invertebrates are known from deposits over 100 million years old. In many marine creatures, however, the skeleton is composed of a mineral variety of calcium carbonate called aragonite. Although aragonite has the same composition as the more familiar mineral known as calcite, it has a different crystal form, is relatively unstable, and in time changes to the more stable calcite.
Many other processes may alter the shell of a clam or snail and enhance its chances for preservation. Water containing dissolved silica, calcium carbonate, or iron may circulate through the enclosing sediment and be deposited in cavities such as marrow cavities and canals in bone once occupied by blood vessels and nerves. In such cases, the original composition of the bone or shell remains, but the fossil is made harder and more durable. This addition of a chemically precipitated substance into pore spaces is termed "permineralization."
Petrifaction may also involve a simultaneous exchange of the original substance of a dead plant or animal with mineral matter of a different composition. This process is termed " replacement" because solutions have dissolved the original material and replaced it with an equal volume of the new substance. Replacement can be a marvelously precise process, so that details of shell ornamentation, tree rings in wood, and delicate structures in bone are accurately preserved.
 Another type of fossilization, known as carbonization, occurs when soft tissues are preserved as thin films of carbon.  Leaves and tissue of soft-bodied organisms such as jellyfish or worms may accumulate, become buried and compressed, and lose their volatile constituents.  The carbon often remains behind as a blackened silhouette. 
Although it is certainly true that the possession of hard parts enhances the prospect of preservation, organisms having soft tissues and organs are also occasionally preserved. Insects and even small invertebrates have been found preserved in the hardened resins of conifers and certain other trees. X-ray examination of thin slabs of rock sometimes reveals the ghostly outlines of tentacles, digestive tracts, and visual organs of a variety of marine creatures. Soft parts, including skin, hair, and viscera of ice age mammoths, have been preserved in frozen soil or in the oozing tar of oil seeps.
The probability that actual remains of soft tissue will be preserved is improved if the organism dies in an environment of rapid deposition and oxygen deprivation. Under such conditions, the destructive effects of bacteria are diminished. The Middle Eocene Messel Shale (from about 48 million years ago) of Germany accumulated in such an environment. The shale was deposited in an oxygen-deficient lake where lethal gases sometimes bubbled up and killed animals. Their remains accumulated on the floor of the lake and were then covered by clay and silt. Among the superbly preserved Messel fossils are insects with iridescent exoskeletons (hard outer coverings), frogs with skin and blood vessels intact, and even entire small mammals with preserved fur and soft tissue.
 
The word "agencies" in the passage is closest in meaning to
combinations
problems
forces
changes
In paragraph 1, what is the author's purpose in providing examples of how organisms are destroyed?
To emphasize how surprising it is that so many fossils exist
To introduce a new geologic theory of fossil preservation
To explain why the fossil record until now has remained incomplete
To compare how fossils form on land and in water
The word "terrestrial" in the passage is closest in meaning to
land
protected
alternative
similar
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
When snail or clam shells are left behind, they must be empty in order to remain durable and resist dissolution.
Although snail and clam shells are durable and resist dissolving, over time they slowly begin to change.
Although the soft parts of snails or clams dissolve quickly, their hard shells resist dissolution for a long time.
Empty snail or clam shells that are strong enough not to dissolve may stay in their original state for a long time.
Why does the author mention "aragonite" in the passage?
To emphasize that some fossils remain unaltered for millions of years
To contrast fossil formation in organisms with soft tissue and in organisms with hard shells
To explain that some marine organisms must undergo chemical changes in order to fossilize
To explain why fossil shells are more likely to survive than are fossil skeletons
The word "enhance" in the passage is closest in meaning to
control
limit
combine
increase
Which of the following best explains the process of permineralization mentioned in paragraph 3?
Water containing calcium carbonate circulates through a shell and deposits sediment.
Liquid containing chemicals hardens an already existing fossil structure.
Water passes through sediment surrounding a fossil and removes its chemical content.
A chemical substance enters a fossil and changes its shape.
The word "precise" in the passage is closest in meaning to
complex
quick
exact
reliable
Paragraph 5 suggests which of the following about the carbonization process?
It is completed soon after an organism dies.
It does not occur in hard-shell organisms.
It sometimes allows soft-tissued organisms to be preserved with all their parts.
It is a more precise process of preservation than is replacement.
The word "prospect" in the passage is closest in meaning to
completion
variety
possibility
speed
According to paragraph 7, how do environments containing oxygen affect fossil preservation?
They increase the probability that soft-tissued organisms will become fossils.
They lead to more bacteria production.
They slow the rate at which clay and silt are deposited.
They reduce the chance that animal remains will be preserved.
According to the passage, all of the following assist in fossil preservation EXCEPT
the presence of calcite in an organism's skeleton
the presence of large open areas along an ocean floor
the deposition of a fossil in sticky substances such as sap or tar
the rapid burial of an organism under layers of silt

Our current ability to precisely engineer crop genomes was preceded by a long history of genetic manipulation in agriculture. Human impact and its accompanying effects began early in our history at many tropical and subtropical sites around the globe. Our ancestors were omnivores, consuming whatever plant or animal material they fortuitously encountered. Even then, humans had considerable effects on the environment, reducing and even driving to extinction populations of the animal species they hunted and expanding the distribution of plants by accidentally distributing seeds as they migrated.
Humans probably first realized that seeds could yield a stable food supply through agriculture when they observed plants arising from refuse or wasteland, perhaps fruit trees growing along forest and jungle paths from discarded or defecated seeds or else vegetables sprouting in garbage dumps at temporary settlements. A more organized approach to agriculture began about eight to ten thousand years ago coincidentally at a number of locations around the globe. The most diverse farming developed in the Near East, with legumes, cereals, flax, sesame, and fruit trees. At about the same time, New World residents were growing beans, maize, squashes, and potatoesand Asian farmers were beginning to cultivate rice.
These early domesticated crops foreshadowed the overwhelming changes contemporary agriculture has wrought in plants. Humans soon learned to separate varieties that could be grown as crops from wild types in order to prevent characteristics undesirable for cultivation from mingling with those selected for farming.Continued selection of crops with desirable characteristics increased the separation between feral (wild) and managed plants and accelerated the diminishing diversity and more limited variation found in today's crops.
The simplest way to select crops is to save seeds preferentially from plants with beneficial traits, and the first farmers selected for large seeds and fruit, increased seed production, lack of dormancy, faster germination, higher annual yield, and reduced seed scattering. The success of this early selection resulted in an accelerating impact of agriculture on crop diversity and feral plants. Crops quickly became commodities, moved and traded over a rapidly widening area, so that many plants were distributed well beyond their previous ranges, and some throughout the globe.
Three phenomena have characterized the more recent impact of agriculture on Earth.  The first was the increase in human population, which has doubled at shorter and shorter intervals over the last thousand years.  The result was increased acreage under cultivation and a fundamental remodeling of the globe toward managed rather than wild ecosystems.  By 1998 there were 3,410,523,800 acres of land under cultivation worldwide, an area larger than the United States.  Entire ecosystems have disappeared, others remain but are threatened, and the sheer volume of people and area of farmland have been major forces of biological change.
The second event through which agriculture modified our planet was European colonization. Previously, migration and trade had moved crops between countries and continents, but the Europeans inaugurated an unprecedented dispersal of biological material worldwide. Maize, tomatoes, and potatoes were transported from the New World to the Old; wheat, rye, and barley were carried from the Old World to the New; and rice, soybeans, and alfalfa were moved from their Asian sources to every arable continent. Each of these and innumerable other introductions conveyed not only unique material but also assemblages of introduced plant pests and diseases that today cause the majority of pest-management problems around the world.
The third factor shaping the nature of agriculture and the environment alike is the increasing precision with which we have selected and bred crops. This acuity stemmed from many advances, but at its heart lies the work of two menone, the English naturalist Charles Darwin, and the other, an Austrian monk, Gregor Mendel. The concepts of evolution and genetics were not their work alone, but both of them were decades ahead of their colleagues in synthesizing the companion concepts of natural selection and inheritance that are at the core of all contemporary biological science and that form the substrate upon which biotechnology grew.
 
According to paragraph 1all of the following are true of early humans EXCEPT:
They fed on any plants and animals that they found.
They significantly reduced the number of animal species through hunting.
They spread plants from one place to another as they migrated.
They introduced new animal species to different parts of the world.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Humans first saw fruit trees growing along pathways and vegetables growing on garbage dumps in temporary settlements and started cultivating them for a steady food supply.
Humans living in temporary settlements noticed that fruit trees and vegetables that they could cultivate for a constant supply of food were growing in waste areas.
Humans saw plants growing in waste areas at temporary settlements and got the idea that they could plant seeds to ensure a constant supply of food.
Humans maintained a constant food supply by planting fruit trees along pathways and vegetables in garbage dumps and other waste areas in temporary settlements.
Why does the author include the information that New World residents were growing beans, maize, squashes, and potatoes?
To support the claim that organized agriculture developed in different parts of the world at the same time
To indicate that different crops were grown in different parts of the world
To argue against the idea that the most diverse farming occurred in the Near East
To indicate that New World farmers cultivated a larger number of crops than Asian farmers did
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 3 about plants with undesirable characteristics?
Farmers cultivated them only when plants with desirable characteristics were not available.
Farmers did not let them grow near plants that were selected for cultivation as crops.
They enabled farmers to more properly manage the plants that were selected for cultivation as crops.
They provided farmers with a limited variety of plants to select for cultivation as crops.
Which of the following is mentioned in paragraph 4 as an effect of crops becoming commodities?
Farmers were able to cultivate a greater variety of crops than they used to.
Trade routes quickly developed as people moved crops from one place to another.
Plants became widely distributed outside their places of origin.
Feral plants were quickly wiped out as more crops were cultivated for trading.
The word inaugurated in the passage is closest in meaning to
encouraged
observed
achieved
introduced
Which of the following is mentioned in paragraph 6 as one of the effects of moving crops from one part of the world to another part of the world?
Europeans were able to successfully colonize other continents.
Plant pests and diseases became more widespread.
Some crops failed to grow very well at their new locations.
New ways to manage pests and diseases that affected crops were introduced.
Which of the following is mentioned in paragraph 7 as being true of Charles Darwin and Gregor Mendel?
They were the first to integrate the concepts of natural selection and inheritance.
They were the first to encourage the use of biotechnology in agriculture.
They were the first to work on evolution and genetics at the same lime.
They were the first to provide farmers with information on selecting and breeding crops.

In the wake of the Roman Empire's conquest of Britain in the first century A.D., a large number of troops stayed in the new province, and these troops had a considerable impact on Britain with their camps, fortifications, and participation in the local economy. Assessing the impact of the army on the civilian population starts from the realization that the soldiers were always unevenly distributed across the country. Areas rapidly incorporated into the empire were not long affected by the military. Where the army remained stationed, its presence was much more influential. The imposition of a military base involved the requisition of native lands for both the fort and the territory needed to feed and exercise the soldiers' animals. The imposition of military rule also robbed local leaders of opportunities to participate in local government, so social development was stunted and the seeds of disaffection sown. This then meant that the military had to remain to suppress rebellion and organize government.
Economic exchange was clearly very important as the Roman army brought with it very substantial spending power. Locally a fort had two kinds of impact.  Its large population needed food and other supplies. Some of these were certainly brought from long distances, but demands were inevitably placed on the local area.  Although goods could be requisitioned, they were usually paid for, and this probably stimulated changes in the local economy.  When not campaigning, soldiers needed to be occupied; otherwise they represented a potentially dangerous source of friction and disloyalty.  Hence a writing tablet dated 25 April tells of 343 men at one fort engaged on tasks like shoemaking, building a bathhouse, operating kilns, digging clay, and working lead. Such activities had a major effect on the local area, in particular with the construction of infrastructure such as roads, which improved access to remote areas.
Each soldier received his pay, but in regions without a developed economy there was initially little on which it could be spent. The pool of excess cash rapidly stimulated a thriving economy outside fort gates. Some of the demand for the services and goods was no doubt fulfilled by people drawn from far afield, but some local people certainly became entwined in this new economy. There was informal marriage with soldiers, who until AD 197 were not legally entitled to wed, and whole new communities grew up near the forts. These settlements acted like small towns, becoming centers for the artisan and trading populations.
The army also provided a means of personal advancement for auxiliary soldiers recruited from the native peoples, as a man obtained hereditary Roman citizenship on retirement after service in an auxiliary regiment. Such units recruited on an ad hoc (as needed) basis from the area in which they were stationed, and there was evidently large-scale recruitment within Britain. The total numbers were at least 12,500 men up to the reign of the emperor Hadrian (A.D. 117-138), with a peak around A.D. 80. Although a small proportion of the total population, this perhaps had a massive local impact when a large proportion of the young men were removed from an area. Newly raised regiments were normally transferred to another province from whence it was unlikely that individual recruits would ever return. Most units raised in Britain went elsewhere on the European continent, although one is recorded in Morocco. The reverse process brought young men to Britain, where many continued to live after their 20 to 25 years of service, and this added to the cosmopolitan Roman character of the frontier population. By the later Roman period, frontier garrisons (groups of soldiers) were only rarely transferred, service in units became effectively hereditary, and forts were no longer populated or maintained at full strength.
This process of settling in as a community over several generations, combined with local recruitment, presumably accounts for the apparent stability of the British northern frontier in the later Roman period. It also explains why some of the forts continued in occupation long after Rome ceased to have any formal authority in Britain, at the beginning of the fifth century A.D. The circumstances that had allowed natives to become Romanized also led the self-sustaining military community of the frontier area to become effectively British.
 
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Many Roman soldiers remained in Britain after conquering it, and their presence had a strong influence.
The new Roman province of Britain seemed to awaken in the first century as the local economy improved.
Camps, fortifications, and economic change contributed to the Roman conquest of Britain.
With the conquest of Britain by Roman troops, the Roman Empire gained considerable economic strength.
According to paragraph 1, the Roman army had the most influence on those areas of Britain that were
conquered first
near population centers
used as military bases
rapidly incorporated into the empire
According to paragraph 1, what effect did military occupation have on the local population?
It encouraged more even distribution of the population and the settlement of previously undeveloped territory.
It created discontent and made continuing military occupation necessary.
It required local labor to construct forts and feed and exercise the soldiers animals.
It provided local leaders with opportunities to participate in governance.
The word suppress in the passage is closest in meaning to
respond to
warn against
avoid the impact of
stop by force
The word friction in the passage is closest in meaning to
rebellion
conflict
neglect
crime
The author mentions 343 men at one fort engaged on tasks like shoemaking, building a bathhouse, operating kilns, digging clay, and working lead in order to
describe the kinds of tasks soldiers were required to perform as punishment for disloyalty or misdeeds
illustrate some of the duties assigned to soldiers to keep them busy and well-behaved when not involved in military campaigns
provide evidence that Roman soldiers had a negative effect on the local area by performing jobs that had been performed by native workers
argue that the soldiers would have been better employed in the construction of infrastructure such as roads
The phrase entitled to in the passage is closest in meaning to
given the right to
able to afford to
encouraged to
required to
According to paragraph 3, how did the soldiers meet their needs for goods and services?
Their needs were met by the army, and all of their economic transactions took place within the fort.
Most of their needs were met by traveling tradespeople who visit the forts.
During their days off, soldiers traveled to distant towns to make purchases.
They bought what they needed from the artisans and traders in nearby towns.
According to paragraph 4, which of the following is true of Britains auxiliary regiments of the Roman army?
Membership in these regiments reached its highest point during the reign of the emperor Hadrian.
Most of the units recruited in Britain were sent to Morocco and other stations outside Europe.
Soldiers served in the regiments for many years and after retirement generally stayed where they had been stationed.
Most of the regiments stationed on the frontier were new units transferred from a neighboring province.
According to paragraph 4, all of the following changes could be seen in the frontier garrisons by the later Roman period EXCEPT:
Membership in the units passed from father to son.
Fewer soldiers were stationed at the forts.
Soldiers usually were not transferred to different locations.
Frontier units became more effective and proficient.
Why does the author mention that some of the forts continued in occupation long after Rome ceased to have any formal authority in Britain ?
To emphasize the degree to which the stability of the British northern frontier depended on firm military control
To suggest that the Romans continued to occupy Britain even after they had formally given up the right to do so
To support the claim that forts continued to serve an import economic function even after they ceased to be of any military use
To describe one of the things that resulted from frontier garrisons becoming part of the local community over a long period
The word circumstances in the passage is closest in meaning to
experiences
communities
conditions
laws

In the late nineteenth century, ecology began to grow into an independent science from its roots in natural history and plant geography. The emphasis of this new "community ecology" was on the composition and structure of communities consisting of different species. In the early twentieth century, the American ecologist Frederic Clements pointed out that a succession of plant communities would develop after a disturbance such as a volcanic eruption, heavy flood, or forest fire. An abandoned field, for instance, will be invaded successively by herbaceous plants (plants with little or no woody tissue), shrubs, and trees, eventually becoming a forest. Light-loving species are always among the first invaders, while shade-tolerant species appear later in the succession.
Clements and other early ecologists saw almost lawlike regularity in the order of succession, but that has not been substantiated. A general trend can be recognized, but the details are usually unpredictable. Succession is influenced by many factors: the nature of the soil, exposure to sun and wind, regularity of precipitation, chance colonizations, and many other random processes.
The final stage of a succession, called the climax by Clements and early ecologists, is likewise not predictable or of uniform composition. There is usually a good deal of turnover in species composition, even in a mature community. The nature of the climax is influenced by the same factors that influenced succession. Nevertheless, mature natural environments are usually in equilibrium. They change relatively little through time unless the environment itself changes.
For Clements, the climax was a "superorganism," an organic entity. Even some authors who accepted the climax concept rejected Clements' characterization of it as a superorganism, and it is indeed a misleading metaphor. An ant colony may be legitimately called a superorganism because its communication system is so highly organized that the colony always works as a whole and appropriately according to the circumstances. But there is no evidence for such an interacting communicative network in a climax plant formation. Many authors prefer the term "association" to the term "community" in order to stress the looseness of the interaction.
Even less fortunate was the extension of this type of thinking to include animals as well as plants. This resulted in the "biome," a combination of coexisting flora and fauna. Though it is true that many animals are strictly associated with certain plants, it is misleading to speak of a "spruce-moose biome," for example, because there is no internal cohesion to their association as in an organism. The spruce community is not substantially affected by either the presence or absence of moose. Indeed, there are vast areas of spruce forest without moose. The opposition to the Clementsian concept of plant ecology was initiated by Herbert Gleason, soon joined by various other ecologists. Their major point was that the distribution of a given species was controlled by the habitat requirements of that species and that therefore the vegetation types were a simple consequence of the ecologies of individual plant species.
With "climax," "biome," "superorganism," and various other technical terms for the association of animals and plants at a given locality being criticized, the term "ecosystem" was more and more widely adopted for the whole system of associated organisms together with the physical factors of their environment. Eventually, the energy-transforming role of such a system was emphasized. Ecosystems thus involve the circulation, transformation, and accumulation of energy and matter through the medium of living things and their activities. The ecologist is concerned primarily with the quantities of matter and energy that pass through a given ecosystem, and with the rates at which they do so.
 
Although the ecosystem concept was very popular in the 1950s and 1960s, it is no longer the dominant paradigm. Gleason's arguments against climax and biome are largely valid 
against ecosystems as well. Furthermore, the number of interactions is so great that they are difficult to analyze, even with the help of large computers. Finally, younger ecologists have found ecological problems involving behavior and life-history adaptations more attractive than measuring physical constants. 
 Nevertheless, one still speaks of the ecosystem when referring to a local association of animals and plants, usually without 
paying much attention to the energy aspects. 

 
According to paragraph 2, which of the following is a criticism of Clements' view of succession?
The principles of succession are more lawlike than Clements thought they are.
More evidence is needed to establish Clements predictions about succession.
The details of succession are affected by random processes.
Many of the factors that determine which plants will grow in an environment, such as the nature of the soil and the exposure to sun, do not change at all.
The word substantiated in the passage is closest in meaning to
confirmed
noticed
defined
publicized
The word trend in the passage is closest in meaning to
probability
picture
lawlike regularity
tendency
The word likewise in the passage is closest in meaning to
sometimes
similarly
apparently
consequently
The word legitimately in the passage is closest in meaning to
commonly
broadly
properly
officially
According to paragraph 4, why do many authors prefer the term association to community when describing a climax plant formation?
Because the term association does not suggest the presence of a tight network involving interactive communication.
Because the term association indicates that the grouping is not necessarily beneficial to all members.
Because the term community indicates continuing dynamic development that a climax formation does not have.
Because the term community suggests an organization that has been designed for a specific purpose
In paragraph 5, the author challenges the idea of a biome by noting that
there are usually no very strong connections among the plants and animals living in a place
plants and animals respond in the same way to the same circumstances
particular combinations of flora and fauna do not generally come about purely by chance
some animals are dependent on specific kinds of plants for food
Why does the author make the statement, Indeed, there are vast areas of spruce forest without moose ?
To highlight a fact whose significance the ecologist Herbert Gleason had missed
To propose the idea that a spruce forest is by itself a superorganism
To emphasize that moose are not limited to a single kind of environment
To criticize the idea of a spruce-moose biome
The word initiated in the passage is closest in meaning to
approved
identified
started
foreseen
According to paragraph 5, Gleasons opposition to the Clementsian views of plant ecology was based on the claim that plant species grow in places where
they can enter into mutually beneficial relationships with other species
conditions suit them, regardless of whether particular other species are present
habitats are available for a wide variety of plant and animal species
their requirements are met, and those of most other species are not
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Unlike the terms "climax", "biome," and "superorganism," which refer to the particular association of plants and animals at a given location, the term ecosystem refers specifically to the physical factors within an environment.
The terms "climax," "biome," "superorganism," and "ecosystem" all refer to the system of plants and animals in an associated environment, but some are more controversial than others.
When the older terms of ecology became too technical, they were replaced by the more popular and more widely used term "ecosystem."
The term "ecosystem" gradually replaced discredited terms for the combination of a physical environment and the plants and animals living together in it.
According to paragraph 6, what did ecologists mainly study when the ecosystem concept was the dominant paradigm?
The physical factors present in different environments
The typical activities of animals and the effect of those activities on plants
The rates at which ecosystems changed from one kind to another
The flow of energy and matter through ecosystems

In the middle of the nineteenth century, Louis Agassiz, one of the first scientists to study glaciers, immigrated to the United States from Switzerland and became a professor at Harvard University, where he continued his studies in geology and other sciences. For his research, Agassiz visited many places in the northern parts of Europe and North America, from the mountains of Scandinavia and New England to the rolling hills of the American Midwest.  In all these diverse regions, Agassiz saw signs of glacial erosion and sedimentation.  In flat plains country, he saw moraines (accumulations of earth and loose rock that form at the edges of glaciers) that reminded him of the terminal moraines found at the end of valley glaciers in the Alps.  The heterogeneous material of the drift (sand, clay, and rocks deposited there) convinced him of its glacial origin.  
The areas covered by this material were so vast that the ice that deposited it must have been a continental glacier larger than Greenland or Antarctica. Eventually, Agassiz and others convinced geologists and the general public that a great continental glaciation had extended the polar ice caps far into regions that now enjoy temperate climates. For the first time, people began to talk about ice ages. It was also apparent that the glaciation occurred in the relatively recent past because the drift was soft, like freshly deposited sediment. We now know the age of the glaciation accurately from radiometric dating of the carbon-14 in logs buried in the drift. The drift of the last glaciation was deposited during one of the most recent epochs of geologic time, the Pleistocene, which lasted from 1.8 million to 10,000 years ago. Along the east coast of the United States, the southernmost advance of this ice is recorded by the enormous sand and drift deposits of the terminal moraines that form Long Island and Cape Cod.
It soon became clear that there were multiple glacial ages during the Pleistocene, with warmer interglacial intervals between them. As geologists mapped glacial deposits in the late nineteenth century, they became aware that there were several layers of drift, the lower ones corresponding to earlier ice ages. Between the older layers of glacial material were well-developed soils containing fossils of warm-climate plants. These soils were evidence that the glaciers retreated as the climate warmed. By the early part of the twentieth century, scientists believed that four distinct glaciations had affected North America and Europe during the Pleistocene epoch.
This idea was modified in the late twentieth century, when geologists and oceanographers examining oceanic sediment found fossil evidence of warming and cooling of the oceans. Ocean sediments presented a much more complete geologic record of the Pleistocene than continental glacial deposits did. The fossils buried in Pleistocene and earlier ocean sediments were of foraminiferasmall, single-celled marine organisms that secrete shells of calcium carbonate, or calcite. These shells differ in their proportion of ordinary oxygen (oxygen-16) and the heavy oxygen isotope (oxygen-18). The ratio of oxygen-16 to oxygen-18 found in the calcite of a foraminifer's shell depends on the temperature of the water in which the organism lived. Different ratios in the shells preserved in various layers of sediment reveal the temperature changes in the oceans during the Pleistocene epoch.
Isotopic analysis of shells allowed geologists to measure another glacial effect. They could trace the growth and shrinkage of continental glaciers, even in parts of the ocean where there may have been no great change in temperaturearound the equator, for example. The oxygen isotope ratio of the ocean changes as a great deal of water is withdrawn from it by evaporation and is precipitated as snow to form glacial ice. During glaciations, the lighter oxygen-16 has a greater tendency to evaporate from the ocean surface than the heavier oxygen-18 does. Thus, more of the heavy isotope is left behind in the ocean and absorbed by marine organisms. From this analysis of marine sediments, geologists have learned that there were many shorter, more regular cycles of glaciation and deglaciation than geologists had recognized from the glacial drift of the continents alone.
 
The word accumulations in the passage is closest in meaning to
signs
pieces
types
deposits
The word heterogeneous in the passage is closest in meaning to
remaining
varied
familiar
layered
According to paragraph 1, what persuaded Louis Agassiz that glaciation in the past had been widespread?
Geologic differences between mountain valleys and flat plains
The presence of similar glacial material in many different regions
Geologic research on mountain glaciers in the Alps
Evidence of regional differences in the drift caused by glacial erosion
The word enjoy in the passage is closest in meaning to
experience
resemble
expect
dominate
It can be inferred from paragraph 2 that Agassiz and other geologists of his time were not able to determine
which geographic regions had been covered with ice sheets in the last ice age
the exact dates at which drifts had been deposited during the last ice age
the exact composition of the drifts laid during the last ice age
how far south along the east coast of the United States the ice had advanced during the last ice age
According to paragraph 3, what did geologists conclude as a result of finding well-developed soils containing warm-climate plant fossils between layers of glacial drift?
There had been only one warm period before the Pleistocene epoch.
There had been multiple periods of mild weather between ice ages.
Several glacial periods occurred after the Pleistocene epoch.
Some earlier epochs were warmer thant the Pleistocene.
According to paragraph 3 and 4, scientists modified their theory about the exact number of glaciations because of evidence obtained from
ocean sediments
interglacial soils
glacial deposits
air samples
The word reveal in the passage is closest in meaning to
result from
vary with
show
preserve
According to paragraph 4, scientists use foraminifera shells to learn about Pleistocene ocean conditions by
measuring the amount of calcium carbonate present in the shells
determining the proportion of shell in each layer of sediment
comparing shells deposited during the Pleistocene with those buried earlier
calculating the relative quantity of two oxygen isotopes in the calcite
In can be inferred from paragraph 5 that foraminifera fossil shells containing calcite with high percentages of oxygen-16 were deposited at times when
polar ice extended as far as equatorial regions of land and sea
extensive glaciation was not occurring
there were no great increases in ocean temperature
there was heavy snowfall on continental glaciers
In paragraph 5, why does the author include the information that the oxygen isotope ratio of the ocean changes as a great deal of water is withdrawn from it by evaporation and is precipitated as snow to form glacial ice ?
To explain how scientists were able to calculate how frequently the continental ice sheets expanded and contracted
To explain how scientists have determined that there was no great change in ocean temperatures at the equator during past glaciations
To provide evidence that oxygen-16 has a greater tendency to evaporate than does oxygen-18
To suggest that equatorial marine organisms absorb more heavy isotopes than do marine organisms elsewhere
According to the passage, when did scientists begin to realize that more than one ice age had occurred ?
In the mid nineteenth century
In the late nineteenth century
In the early twentieth century
In the late twentieth century

While some European countries, such as England and Germany, began to industrialize in the eighteenth century, the Netherlands and the Scandinavian countries of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden developed later.   All four of these countries lagged considerably behind in the early nineteenth century.  However, they industrialized rapidly in the second half of the century, especially in the last two or three decades.  In view of their later start and their lack of coalundoubtedly the main reason they were not among the early industrializersit is important to understand the sources of their success.  
All had small populations. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, Denmark and Norway had fewer than 1 million people, while Sweden and the Netherlands had fewer than 2.5 million inhabitants. All exhibited moderate growth rates in the course of the century (Denmark the highest and Sweden the lowest), but all more than doubled in population by 1900. Density varied greatly. The Netherlands had one of the highest population densities in Europe, whereas Norway and Sweden had the lowest Denmark was in between but closer to the Netherlands.
Considering human capital as a characteristic of the population, however, all four countries were advantaged by the large percentages of their populations who could read and write. In both 1850 and 1914, the Scandinavian countries had the highest literacy rates in Europe, or in the world, and the Netherlands was well above the European average. This fact was of enormous value in helping the national economies find their niches in the evolving currents of the international economy.
Location was an important factor for all four countries. All had immediate access to the sea, and this had important implications for a significant international resource, fish, as well as for cheap transport, merchant marines, and the shipbuilding industry. Each took advantage of these opportunities in its own way. The people of the Netherlands, with a long tradition of fisheries and mercantile shipping, had difficulty in developing good harbors suitable for steamships: eventually they did so at Rotterdam and Amsterdam, with exceptional results for transit trade with Germany and central Europe and for the processing of overseas foodstuffs and raw materials (sugar, tobacco, chocolate, grain, and eventually oil). Denmark also had an admirable commercial history, particularly with respect to traffic through the Sound (the strait separating Denmark and Sweden). In 1857, in return for a payment of 63 million kronor from other commercial nations, Denmark abolished the Sound toll dues the fees it had collected since 1497 for the use of the Sound. This, along with other policy shifts toward free trade, resulted in a significant increase in traffic through the Sound and in the port of Copenhagen.
The political institutions of the four countries posed no significant barriers to industrialization or economic growth. The nineteenth century passed relatively peacefully for these countries, with progressive democratization taking place in all of them. They were reasonably well governed, without notable corruption or grandiose state projects, although in all of them the government gave some aid to railways, and in Sweden the state built the main lines. As small countries dependent on foreign markets, they followed a liberal trade policy in the main, though a protectionist movement developed in Sweden. In Denmark and Sweden agricultural reforms took place gradually from the late eighteenth century through the first half of the nineteenth, resulting in a new class of peasant landowners with a definite market orientation.
The key factor in the success of these countries (along with high literacy, which contributed to it) was their ability to adapt to the international division of labor determined by the early industrializers and to stake out areas of specialization in international markets for which they were especially well suited. This meant a great dependence on international commerce, which had notorious fluctuations; but it also meant high returns to those factors of production that were fortunate enough to be well placed in times of prosperity. In Sweden exports accounted for 18 percent of the national income in 1870, and in 1913, 22 percent of a much larger national income. In the early twentieth century, Denmark exported 63 percent of its agricultural production: butter, pork products, and eggs. It exported 80 percent of its butter, almost all to Great Britain, where it accounted for 40 percent of British butter imports.
 
Paragraph 1 supports which of the following ideas about England and Germany?
They were completely industrialized by the start of the nineteenth century.
They possessed plentiful supplies of coal.
They were overtaken economically by the Netherlands and Scandinavia during the early nineteenth century.
They succeeded for the same reasons that the Netherlands and Scandinavia did.
Paragraph 2 suggests which of the following about the importance of population density in the industrialization of the Netherlands and Scandinavia?
It was a more important factor than population size.
It was more influential than the rate of population growth.
It was more important in the early stages than it was later.
It was not a significant factor.
According to paragraphs 2 and 3, which of the following contributed significantly to the successful economic development of the Netherlands and of Scandinavia?
The relatively small size of their populations
The rapid rate at which their populations were growing
The large amount of capital they had available for investment
The high proportion of their citizens who were educated
According to paragraph 4, because of their location, the Netherlands and the Scandinavian countries had all of the following advantages when they began to industrialize EXCEPT
low-cost transportation of goods
access to fish
shipbuilding industries
military control of the sea
The word exceptional in the passage is closest in meaning to
extraordinary
surprising
immediate
predictable
The word abolished in the passage is closest in meaning to
ended
raised
returned
lowered
According to paragraph 5, each of the following contributed positively to the industrialization of the Netherlands and Scandinavia EXCEPT
generally liberal trade policies
huge projects undertaken by the state
relatively uncorrupt governments
relatively little social or political disruption
The word progressive in the passage is closest in meaning to
rapid
partial
increasing
individual
The author includes the information that a protectionist movement developed in Sweden in order to
support the claim that the political institutions of the four countries posed no significant barriers to industrialization or economic growth
identify an exception to the general trend favoring liberal trade policy
explain why Sweden industrialized less quickly than the other Scandinavian countries and Netherlands
provide evidence that agricultural reforms take place more quickly in countries that have a liberal trade policy than in those that do not
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
The early industrializes controlled most of the international economy, leaving these countries to stake out new areas of specialization along the margins.
Aided by their high literacy rates these countries were able to claim key areas of specialization within established international markets.
High literacy rates enabled these countries to take over international markets and adapt the international division of labor to suit their strengths.
The international division of labor established by the early industrializers was suited to these countries, a key factor in their success.
According to paragraph 6, a major problem with depending heavily on international markets was that they
lacked stability
were not well suited to agricultural products
were largely controlled by the early industrializers
led to slower growth of local industries
According to paragraph 6, what advantage could a country gain from being heavily involved in international commerce?
A steadily rising national income
Greater control over market fluctuations
High returns when things went well
A reduced need for imports

According to conventional theory, yawning takes place when people are bored or sleepy and serves the function of increasing alertness by reversing, through deeper breathing, the drop in blood oxygen levels that are caused by the shallow breathing that accompanies lack of sleep or boredom. Unfortunately, the few scientific investigations of yawning have failed to find any connection between how often someone yawns and how much sleep they have had or how tired they are. About the closest any research has come to supporting the tiredness theory is to confirm that adults yawn more often on weekdays than at weekends, and that school children yawn more frequently in their first year at primary school than they do in kindergarten.
Another flaw of the tiredness theory is that yawning does not raise alertness or physiological activity, as the theory would predict. When researchers measured the heart rate, muscle tension and skin conductance of people before, during and after yawning, they did detect some changes in skin conductance following yawning, indicating a slight increase in physiological activity. However, similar changes occurred when the subjects were asked simply to open their mouths or to breathe deeply. Yawning did nothing special to their state of physiological activity. Experiments have also cast serious doubt on the belief that yawning is triggered by a drop in blood oxygen or a rise in blood carbon dioxide.  Volunteers were told to think about yawning while they breathed either normal air, pure oxygen, or an air mixture with an above-normal level of carbon dioxide.  If the theory was correct, breathing air with extra carbon dioxide should have triggered yawning, while breathing pure oxygen should have suppressed yawning.  In fact, neither condition made any difference to the frequency of yawning, which remained constant at about 24 yawns per hour.  Another experiment demonstrated that physical exercise, which was sufficiently vigorous to double the rate of breathing, had no effect on the frequency of yawning. Again the implication is that yawning has little or nothing to do with oxygen.
A completely different theory holds that yawning assists in the physical development of the lungs early in life, but has no remaining biological function in adults. It has been suggested that yawning and hiccupping might serve to clear out the fetuses airways. The lungs of a fetus secrete a liquid that mixes with its mother's amniotic fluid. Babies with congenital blockages that prevent this fluid from escaping from their lungs are sometimes born with deformed lungs. It might be that yawning helps to clear out the lungs by periodically lowering the pressure in them. According to this theory, yawning in adults is just a developmental fossil with no biological function. But, while accepting that not everything in life can be explained by Darwinian evolution, there are sound reasons for being skeptical of theories like this one, which avoid the issue of what yawning does for adults. Yawning is distracting, consumes energy and takes time. It is almost certainly doing something significant in adults as well as in fetuses. What could it be?
The empirical evidence, such as it is, suggests an altogether different function for yawningnamely, that yawning prepares us for a change in activity level. Support for this theory came from a study of yawning behavior in everyday life. Volunteers wore wrist-mounted devices that automatically recorded their physical activity for up to two weeks: the volunteers also recorded their yawns by pressing a button on the device each time they yawned. The data showed that yawning tended to occur about 15 minutes before a period of increased behavioral activity. Yawning bore no relationship to sleep patterns, however. This accords with anecdotal evidence that people often yawn in situations where they are neither tired nor bored, but are preparing for impending mental and physical activity. Such yawning is often referred to as "incongruous" because it seems out of place, at least on the tiredness view: soldiers yawning before combat, musicians yawning before performing, and athletes yawning before competing. Their yawning seems to have nothing to do with sleepiness or boredomquite the reversebut it does precede a change in activity level.
 
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
It is the conventional theory that when people are bored or sleepy, they often experience a drop in blood oxygen levels due to their shallow breathing.
The conventional theory is that people yawn when bored or sleepy because yawning raises blood oxygen levels, which in turn raises alertness.
According to conventional theory, yawning is more likely to occur when people are bored or sleepy than when they are alert and breathing deeply.
Yawning, according to the conventional theory, is caused by boredom or lack of sleep and can be avoided through deeper breathing.
In paragragh1, what point does the author make about the evidence for the tiredness theory of yawning?
There is no scientific evidence linking yawning with tiredness.
The evidence is wide-ranging because it covers multiple age-groups.
The evidence is reliable because it was collected over a long period of time.
The evidence is questionable because the yawning patterns of children and adults should be different.
The word flaw in the passage is closest in meaning to
fault
aspect
confusion
mystery
In the paragraph 2, why does the author note that there were physiological changes when subjects opened their mouths or breathed deeply?
To present an argument in support of the tiredness theory
To cast doubt on the reliability of the tests that measured heart rate, muscle tension and skin conductance
To argue against the hypothesis that yawning provides a special way to improve alertness or raise physiological activity
To support the idea that opening the mouth or breathing deeply can affect blood oxygen levels
The word triggered in the passage is closest in meaning to
removed
followed
increased
caused
Paragraph 2 answers all of the following questions about yawning EXCEPT
Does yawning increase alertness or physiological activity?
Does thinking about yawning increase yawning over not thinking about yawning?
Does the amount of carbon dioxide and oxygen in the air affect the rate at which people yawn?
Does the rate of breathing affect the rate at which people yawn?
The word periodically in the passage is closest in the meaning to
continuously
quickly
regularly
carefully
According to the developmental theory of yawning presented in paragraph 3, what is the role of yawning?
It caused hiccups, which aid in the development of the lungs.
It controls the amount of pressure the lungs place on other developing organs.
It prevents amniotic fluid from entering the lungs.
It removes a potentially harmful fluid from the lungs.
Paragraph 3 supports which of the following statements about the development theory of yawning?
The theory is attractive because it explains yawning from the perspective of Darwinian evolution.
The theory is unsatisfactory because it cannot explain the lung deformities of infants.
The theory is questionable because it does not explain why a useless and inconvenient behavior would continue into adulthood.
The theory is incomplete because it does not explain all the evolutionary stages in the development of yawning.
The word empirical in the passage is closest in meaning to
reliable
based on common sense
relevant
based on observation
The study of yawning behavior discussed in paragraph 4 supports which of the following conclusions?
Yawning is associated with an expectation of increased physical activity.
Yawning occurs more frequently when people are asked to record their yawning.
People tend to yawn about fifteen minutes before they become tired or bored.
Mental or physical stress tends to make people yawn.
Why does the author mention soldiers yawning before combat, musicians yawning before performing, and athletes yawning before competing?
To argue that just the expectation of physical activity can make some people feel tired
To explain how the view that people yawn because they are tired accounts for yawning before stressful situations
To support the view that yawning helps prepare a person for mental or physical exertion
To provide anecdotal evidence that conflicts with the experience of the volunteers in the study

Lightning is a brilliant flash of light produced by an electrical discharge from a storm cloud. The electrical discharge takes place when the attractive tension between a region of negatively charged particles and a region of positively charged particles becomes so great that the charged particles suddenly rush together. The coming together of the oppositely charged particles neutralizes the electrical tension and releases a tremendous amount of energy, which we see as lightning. The separation of positively and negatively charged particles takes place during the development of the storm cloud.
The separation of charged particles that forms in a storm cloud has a sandwich-like structure. Concentrations of positively charged particles develop at the top and bottom of the cloud, but the middle region becomes negatively charged. Recent measurements made in the field together with laboratory simulations offer a promising explanation of how this structure of charged particles forms. What happens is that small (millimeter-to centimeter-size) pellets of ice form in the cold upper regions of the cloud. When these ice pellets fall, some of them strike much smaller ice crystals in the center of the cloud. The temperature at the center of the cloud is about -15 or lower. At such temperatures, the collision between the ice pellets and the ice crystals causes electrical charges to shift so that the ice pellets acquire a negative charge and the ice crystals become positively charged. Then updraft wind currents carry the light, positively charged ice crystals up to the top of the cloud. The heavier negatively charged ice pellets are left to concentrate in the center. This process explains why the top of the cloud becomes positively charged, while the center becomes negatively charged. The negatively charged region is large: several hundred meters thick and several kilometers in diameter. Below this large, cold, negatively charged region, the cloud is warmer than -15, and at these temperatures, collisions between ice crystals and falling ice pellets produce positively charged ice pellets that then populate a small region at the base of the cloud.
Most lightning takes place within a cloud when the charge separation within the cloud collapses. However, as the storm cloud develops, the ground beneath the cloud becomes positively charged and lightning can take place in the form of an electrical discharge between the negative charge of the cloud and the positively charged ground. Lightning that strikes the ground is the most likely to be destructive, so even though it represents only 20 percent of all lightning, it has received a lot of scientific attention.
Using high-speed photography, scientists have determined that there are two steps to the occurrence of lightning from a cloud to the ground. First, a channel, or path, is formed that connects the cloud and the ground. Then a strong current of electrons follows that path from the cloud to the ground, and it is that current that illuminates the channel as the lightning we see.
The formation of the channel is initiated when electrons surge from the cloud base toward the ground. When a stream of these negatively charged electrons comes within 100 meters of the ground it is met by a stream of positively charged particles that comes up from the ground. When the negatively and positively charged streams meet, a complete channel connecting the cloud and the ground is formed. The channel is only a few centimeters in diameter, but that is wide enough for electrons to follow the channel to the ground in the visible form of a flash of lightning. The stream of positive particles that meets the surge of electrons from the cloud often arises from a tall pointed structure such as a metal flagpole or a tower. That is why the subsequent lightning that follows the completed channel often strikes a tall structure. 
Once a channel has been formed, it is usually used by several lightning discharges, each of them consisting of a stream of electrons from the cloud meeting a stream of positive particles along the established path.  Sometimes, however, a stream of electrons following an established channel is met by a positive stream making a new path up from the ground.  The result is a forked lightning that strikes the ground in two places. 
 
According to paragraph 1, all of the following take place in the development of a flash of lightening EXCEPT
great tension between two oppositely charged regions
an increase in negatively charged particles over positively charged particles
oppositely charged particles coming together
the release of electrical energy in the form of visible light
The word tremendous in the passage is closest in meaning to
distinct
growing
huge
immediate
According to paragraph2, what causes ice crystal to become positively charged?
Collisions with ice pellets
Collisions with negatively charged ice crystals at the base of the cloud
Becoming concentrated in the central region of the cloud
Forming at a temperature greater than -15
The word acquire in the passage is closest in meaning to
reject
obtain
need
produce
According to paragraph2, why are positively charged ice pellets produced in the lower part of the cloud?
Collisions between ice crystals and ice pellets increase in number in the lower part of the cloud.
The lower part of the cloud is smaller than the region above it.
More ice pellets than ice crystals reach the lower part of the cloud.
Temperature in the lower part of the cloud are warmer than -15.
According to paragraph2, the middle region of a cloud becomes negatively charged due to all of the following EXCEPT
a shift of electrical charged between ice pellets and ice crystals
negatively charged ice pellets that remain in the middle
a temperature of -15 or less
the development of a positive charge at the base of the cloud
It can be inferred from paragraph 2 that part of the reason that the top of a storm cloud becomes positively charged is that
the top of the cloud is warmer than the middle of the cloud
the middle of the cloud is already occupied by positively charged particles
the negatively charged ice pellets are too heavy to be carried by the updrafts that move ice crystals
collisions between ice pellets in the top of the cloud produce mainly positively charged particles
The author remarks that Lightning that strikes the ground is the most likely to be destructive in order to explain why
this form of lightning has been investigated so much
this form of lightning is not as common as lightning within a cloud
scientific understanding of this form of lightning is important
the buildup of positive charge on the ground beneath a storm cloud can have serious consequences
The word illuminates in the passage is closet in meaning to
opens
completes
lights
electrifies
According to paragraph5, which of the following is true of the stream of charged particles from the ground?
It prevents streams of electrons from the cloud from striking the ground.
It completes a channel that connects the storm cloud with the ground.
It produces a stream of electrons from the cloud.
It widens the path made by the initial stream of electrons from the cloud.
Which of the following claims about lightning strikes can be inferred from paragraph 5?
During a lightning strike the diameter of the channel the electrons follow is considerably enlarged beyond a few centimeters.
A building is unlikely to be hit by lightning unless it is at least 100 meters tall.
A building is hit by a lightning strike because the building itself has first determined the path the lightening then takes to it.
The light of a lightning strike first appears at the point where the streams of negative and positive particles meet.
The word initiated is closet in meaning to
started
intensified
finished
expected

In the fourteenth century, a number of political developments cut Europe's overland trade routes to southern and eastern Asia, with which Europe had had important and highly profitable commercial ties since the twelfth century. This development, coming as it did when the bottom had fallen out of the European economy, provided an impetus to a long-held desire to secure direct relations with the East by establishing a sea trade. Widely reported, if somewhat distrusted, accounts by figures like the famous traveler from Venice, Marco Polo, of the willingness of people in China to trade with Europeans and of the immensity of the wealth to be gained by such contact made the idea irresistible. Possibilities for trade seemed promising, but no hope existed for maintaining the traditional routes over land. A new way had to be found.
The chief problem was technological: How were the Europeans to reach the East? Europe's maritime tradition had developed in the context of easily navigable seasthe Mediterranean, the Baltic, and, to a lesser extent, the North Sea between England and the Continentnot of vast oceans. New types of ships were needed, new methods of finding one's way, new techniques for financing so vast a scheme. The sheer scale of the investment it took to begin commercial expansion at sea reflects the immensity of the profits that such East-West trade could create.  Spices were the most sought-after commodities.  Spices not only dramatically improved the taste of the European diet but also were used to manufacture perfumes and certain medicines.  But even high-priced commodities like spices had to be transported in large bulk in order to justify the expense and trouble of sailing around the African continent all the way to India and China. 
The principal seagoing ship used throughout the Middle Ages was the galley, a long, low ship fitted with sails but driven primarily by oars. The largest galleys had as many as 50 oarsmen. Since they had relatively shallow hulls, they were unstable when driven by sail or when on rough water: hence they were unsuitable for the voyage to the East. Even if they hugged the African coastline, they had little chance of surviving a crossing of the Indian Ocean. Shortly after 1400, shipbuilders began developing a new type of vessel properly designed to operate in rough, open water: the caravel. It had a wider and deeper hull than the galley and hence could carry more cargo: increased stability made it possible to add multiple masts and sails. In the largest caravels, two main masts held large square sails that provided the bulk of the thrust driving the ship forward, while a smaller forward mast held a triangular-shaped sail, called a lateen sail, which could be moved into a variety of positions to maneuver the ship.
The astrolabe had long been the primary instrument for navigation, having been introduced in the eleventh century. It operated by measuring the height of the Sun and the fixed stars: by calculating the angles created by these points, it determined the degree of latitude at which one stood (The problem of determining longitude, though, was not solved until the eighteenth century.) By the early thirteenth century,Western Europeans had also developed and put into use the magnetic compass, which helped when clouds obliterated both the Sun and the stars. Also beginning in the thirteenth century, there were new maps refined by precise calculations and the reports of sailors that made it possible to trace one's path with reasonable accuracy. Certain institutional and practical norms had become established as well. A maritime code known as the Consulate of the Sea, which originated in the western Mediterranean region in the fourteenth century, won acceptance by a majority of sea goers as the normative code for maritime conduct; it defined such matters as the authority of a ship's officers, protocols of command, pay structures, the rights of sailors, and the rules of engagement when ships met one another on the sea-lanes. Thus by about 1400 the key elements were in place to enable Europe to begin its seaward adventure.
 
The word impetus in the passage is closest in meaning t
Return
Opportunity
Stimulus
Obstacle
According to paragraph 1 why was it necessary to find a new way for European merchants to reach the East?
People in China were finally ready to trade with Europeans
The European economy was failing because there was no trade with the East
Traditional ways of trading with the East had become very costly
Commercial routes over land had become blocked because of political events
According to paragraph 2, what was the main difficulty Europeans had to overcome in order to develop a new way of trading with the East?
Europeans were unwilling to invest in large-scale commercial ventures.
Europeans lacked the means for navigating long distances across oceans.
Europeans were unwilling to experiment with new business techniques.
Europeans lacked knowledge about the commercial methods of other peoples.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
The high cost to investors of developing trade by sea between East and West indicates the great size of the profits that such trade could produce.
The profits that could be created by sea trade between East and West were immense compared with the investment required to develop such trade.
The increase in commercial activity by using sea routes reflects the importance trade between East and West had for investors seeking great profits.
Because people made large investments in sea commerce between East and West. They expected to make immense profits.
The word dramatically in the passage is closest in meaning to
Artificially
Greatly
Immediately
Regularly
It can be inferred from paragraph 2 that spices from Asia were desirable in Europe in the Middle Ages because they
were easily transported in large quantities
could not be produced in European countries
could be traded for products such as perfumes and medicines
were expected to increase in value over time
According to paragraph 3, all of the following statements comparing the caravel with the galley are true EXCEPT:
The caravel had fewer masts than the galley.
The caravel had a wider hull than the galley.
The caravel could carry more cargo than the galley.
The caravel was more stable in rough water than the galley.
According to paragraph 3, what did the lateen sail contribute to the caravel as a sailing ship?
It provided stability for the front part of the ship.
It made it possible for the hull to be wider and deeper.
It added considerably to the speed of the wind-driven ship.
It improved the capacity of the ship to be guided.
Why does the author include the information that Western Europeans had developed and put into use the magnetic compass?
To provide an example of an instrument that was developed after caravels had begun traveling across oceans
To provide an example of an improvement that resulted directly from the invention of the astrolabe
To identify one of the technological advances that made sea trade with the East possible
To explain how the problem of determining longitude was solved
The word refined in the passage is closest in meaning to
Completed
Improved
Drawn
Checked
The word norms in the passage is closest in meaning to
purposes
skills
activities
rules
According to paragraph 4, which of the following is true of the maritime code developed in Europe in the fourteenth century?
It mapped out lanes in the seas for trading ships to follow.
It defined the ways in which people should behave at sea.
It replaced an earlier code that could not be adapted to the sea trade with the East.
It gave instructions on how to navigate a ship.

The daytime quality of light in forests varies with the density of the vegetation, the angle of the Sun, and the amount of cloud in the sky. Both animals and plants have different appearances in these various lighting conditions. A color or pattern that is relatively indistinct in one kind of light may be quite conspicuous in another.
In the varied and constantly changing light environment of the forest, an animal must be able to send visual signals to members of its own species and at the same time avoid being detected by predators. An animal can hide from predators by choosing the light environment in which its pattern is least visible. This may require moving to different parts of the forest at different times of the day or under different weather conditions, or it may be achieved by changing color according to the changing light conditions. Many species of amphibians (frogs and toads) and reptiles (lizards and snakes) are able to change their color patterns to camouflage themselves. Some also signal by changing color. The chameleon lizard has the most striking ability to do this. Some chameleon species can change from a rather dull appearance to a full riot of carnival colors in seconds. By this means, they signal their level of aggression or readiness to mate.
Other species take into account the changing conditions of light by performing their visual displays only when the light is favorable. A male bird of paradise may put himself in the limelight by displaying his spectacular plumage in the best stage setting to attract a female. Certain butterflies move into spots of sunlight that have penetrated to the forest floor and display by opening and closing their beautifully patterned wings in the bright spotlights They also compete with each other for the best spot of sunlight.
Very little light filters through the canopy of leaves and branches in a rain forest to reach ground levelor close to the groundand at those levels the yellow-to-green wavelengths predominate. A signal might be most easily seen if it is maximally bright. In the green-to yellow lighting conditions of the lowest levels of the forest, yellow and green would be the brightest colors, but when an animal is signaling, these colors would not be very visible if the animal was sitting in an area with a yellowish or greenish background. The best signal depends not only on its brightness but also on how well it contrasts with the background against which it must be seen. In this part of the rain forest, therefore, red and orange are the best colors for signaling, and they are the colors used in signals by the ground-walking Australian brush turkey. This species, which lives in the rain forests and scrublands of the east coast of Australia, has a brown to-black plumage with bare, bright-red skin on the head and neck and a neck collar of orange-yellow loosely hanging skin. During courtship and aggressive displays, the turkey enlarges its colored neck collar by inflating sacs in the neck region and then flings about a pendulous part of the colored signaling apparatus as it utters calls designed to attract or repel. This impressive display is clearly visible in the light spectrum illuminating the forest floor.
 Less colorful birds and animals that inhabit the rain forest tend to rely on forms of signaling other than the visual, particularly over long distances.
  The piercing cries of the rhinoceros hornbill characterize the Southeast Asian rain forest, as do the unmistakable calls of the gibbons.
 In densely wooded environments,sound is the best means of communication over distance because in comparison with light, it travels with little impediment from trees and other vegetation.
  In forests, visual signals can be seen only at short distances, where they are not obstructed by trees.  The male riflebird exploits both of these modes of signaling simultaneously 
in his courtship display. The sounds made as each wing is opened carry extremely well over distance and advertise his presence widely. The ritualized visual display communicates in close 
quarters when a female has approached.                             
 
The phrase conspicuous in the passage is closest in meaning t
Common
Noticeable
Different
Colorful
According to paragraph 2, what is problematic about an animal's sending visual signals to members of its own species?
Signs that make an animal visible to its species also make it visible to predators.
An animal that changes color to avoid predators can confuse members of its species.
Changing light may require an animal to move beyond the visual range of other members.
The animal may mistakenly signal aggression when it meant to signal readiness to mate.
The word signal in the passage is closest in meaning to
change
imitate
communicate
hide
According to paragraph 2, all of the following are reasons amphibians and reptiles change color EXCEPT
changing seasons
to signal others of their species
to match the light
to hide from predators
According to paragraph 3, butterflies move into spots of sunlight in order to
warm their wings in order to open them
compete with each other
take advantage of favorable light conditions on the forest floor
imitate birds of paradise
According to paragraph 4, what is true about light that reaches ground level?
It reveals only the yellow and green colors animals use to signal each other.
It reflects the yellow and green colors to make the floor as bright as sunshine.
It camouflages animals whose natural colors are yellow and green.
It consists mostly of yellow-to-green wavelengths.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
When an animal is signaling in an area with green-to yellow lighting condition. Its signal will not be visible if the background is brightly lit.
In the lowest levels of the forest, an animal's signals are not easily seen unless there is a yellowish or greenish background.
In the green-to-yellow lighting conditions at the lowest levels of the forest, only signals that are themselves green or yellow will be bright enough to be seen in most areas.
Although green and yellow would be the brightest colors near the forest floor, these colors would make poor signals whenever the forest background was also in the green-to-yellow range.
The word inflating in the passage is closest in meaning to
Coloring
Enlarging
Loosening
Heating
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 4 about yellow and green colors compared with red and orange colors at the bottom of the forest?
Yellow and green are better colors for signaling than red and orange colors.
Orange and red are brighter colors than yellow and green.
Yellow and green are likely to be more common in the background than red and orange.
Orange and red colors do not contrast as well with the forest floor as yellow and green do.
What can be inferred from paragraph 5 about the less colorful birds and animals that inhabit the forest?
These species are less able to see color. and therefore they communicate with one another using nonvisual signals.
These species generally live in less densely wooded environments than more colorful birds and animals do.
The cries of these species do not carry as well over distances as the cries of more colorful birds and animals.
These species depend more on nonvisual signals for communication because they are less visible in their environment.
The word impediment in the passage is closest in meaning to
obstruction
effort
delay
resistance
The word exploits in the passage is closest in meaning to
repeats
makes use of
increases the intensity of
recognizes

While many other observers and thinkers had laid the groundwork for science, Thales (circa 624 B.C.E-ca 547 B.C.E.), the best known of the earliest Greek philosophers, made the first steps toward a new, more objective approach to finding out about the world. He posed a very basic question: "What is the world made of? " Many others had asked the same question before him, but Thales based his answer strictly on what he had observed and what he could reason out-not on imaginative stories about the gods or the supernatural. He proposed water as the single substance from which everything in the world was made and developed a model of the universe with Earth as a flat disk floating in water.
Like most of the great Greek philosophers, Thales had an influence on others around him. His two best-known followers, though there were undoubtedly others who attained less renown, were Anaximander and Anaximenes. Both were also from Miletus (located on the southern coast of present-day Turkey) and so, like Thales, were members of the Milesian School. Much more is known about Anaximander than about Anaximenes, probably because Anaximander, who was born sometime around 610 B.C.E, ambitiously attempted to write a comprehensive history of the universe. As would later happen between another teacher-student pair of philosophers, Plato and Aristotle, Anaximander disagreed with his teacher despite his respect for him. He doubted that the world and all its contents could be made of water and proposed instead a formless and unobservable substance he called "apeiron" that was the source of all matter.
Anaximander's most important contributions, though, were in other areas. Although he did not accept that water was the prime element, he did believe that all life originated in the sea, and he was thus one of the first to conceive of this important idea. Anaximander is credited with drawing up the first world map of the Greeks and also with recognizing that Earth's surface was curved.He believed, though, that the shape of Earth was that of a cylinder rather than the sphere that later Greek philosophers would conjecture. Anaximander, observing the motions of the heavens around the polestar, was probably the first of the Greek philosophers to picture the sky as sphere completely surrounding Earth-an idea that, elaborated upon later, would prevail until the advent of the Scientific Revolution in the seventeenth century.
Unfortunately, most of Anaximander's written history of the universe was lost, and only a few fragments survive today. Little is known about his other ideas. Unfortunately, too, most of the written work for Anaximenes, who may have been Anaximander's pupil, has also been lost. All we can say for certain about Anaximenes, who was probably born around 560 BCE, is that following in the tradition of Anaximander, he also disagreed with his mentor. The world, according to Anaximenes, was not composed of either water or apeiron, but air itself was the fundamental element of the universe. Compressed, it became water and earth, and when rarefied or thinned out, it heated up to become fire. Anaximenes may have also been the first to study rainbows and speculate upon their natural rather than supernatural cause.
With the door opened by Thales and the other early philosophers of Milestus, Greek thinkers began to speculate about the nature of the universe. This exciting burst of intellectual activity was for the most part purely creative.  The Greeks, from Thales to Plato and Aristotle, were philosophers and not scientists in today's sense.  It is possible for anyone to create "ideas" about the nature and structure of the universe, for instance, and many times these ideas can be so consistent and elaborately structured, or just so apparently obvious, that they can be persuasive to many people.  A scientific theory about the universe, however, demands much more than the various observations and analogies that were woven together to form systems of reasoning, carefully constructed as they were, that would eventually culminate in Aristotle's model of the world and the universe.   Without experimentation and objective, critical testing of their theories, the best these thinkers could hope to achieve was some internally consistent speculation that covered all the bases and satisfied the demands of reason. 
 
Why does the author discuss the question "What is the world made of?" posed by Thales?
To help explain how Thales differed from earlier Greek thinkers.
To trace the origin of the question through ancient history.
To emphasize that the answer to the question proposed by Thales was the first correct solution.
To suggest why the question remained unanswered for so long.
The word "renown" in the passage is closest in meaning to
power
fame
wealth
wisdom
The word "comprehensive" in the passage is closest in meaning to
complete
true
short
academic
Paragraph 2 implies which of the following about Thales?
His students tended to closely follow his views.
He was born sometimes around 600 BCE.
Little is known about most of his followers.
His influence was largely limited to the town of Miletus.
The highlighted word "him" in paragraph 2 refers to
Thales
Anaximander
Anaximenes
Plato
According to paragraph 3, some Greek philosophers who came after Anaximander did not share his belief that
the world was made of something other than water.
all life originated in the sea.
the sky was a sphere surrounding Earth.
Earth was cylindrical in shape.
The phrase "elaborated upon" in the passage is closest in meaning to
proved wrong
misunderstood
repeated
Further developed
Why does the author refer to "the Scientific Revolution in the seventeenth century" ?
To identify the time when Anaximander's theory was first considered seriously.
To introduce the evidence that helped to develop Anaximander's ideas.
To indicate how long one of Anaximander's ideas remained influential.
To give an example of the many unsuccessful attempts to discredit Anaximander's ideas.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Like Anaximander, Anaximenes disagreed with his mentor.
Traditionally, philosophers born after Anaximenes tended to disagree with their own mentors.
Historians have been able to determine that Anaximenes was born in 560 B.C.E and that he followed in the tradition of Anaximander.
Even though Anaximenes was Anaximander's follower, he disagreed with his mentor.
According to paragraph 4, Anaximenes believed that
when water was heated up, it became apeiron.
Earth was made of compressed air.
the heat from a fire caused the air to become thinner.
Rainbows had both natural and supernatural causes.
Paragraph 5 suggests that, in speculating about the nature of the universe, Milesian thinkers
made careful use of reasoning
studied the universe scientifically
tested their theories critically
kept their theories simple
The word "culminate" in the passage is closest in meaning to
be included
combine
reach completion
be rejected

A symbiotic relationship is an interaction between two or more species in which one species lives in or on another species. There are three main types of symbiotic relationships: parasitism, commensalism, and mutualism. The first and the third can be key factors in the structure of a biological community; that is, all the populations of organisms living together and potentially interacting in a particular area.
Parasitism is a kind of predator-prey relationship in which one organism, the parasite, derives its food at the expense of its symbiotic associate, the host. Parasites are usually smaller than their hosts. An example of a parasite is a tapeworm that lives inside the intestines of a larger animal and absorbs nutrients from its host. Natural selection favors the parasites that are best able to find and feed on hosts. At the same time, defensive abilities of hosts are also selected for. As an example, plants make chemicals toxic to fungal and bacterial parasites, along with ones toxic to predatory animals (sometimes they are the same chemicals). In vertebrates, the immune system provides a multiple defense against internal parasites.

At times, it is actually possible to watch the effects of natural selection in host-parasite relationships. For example, Australia during the 1940 s was overrun by hundreds of 
millions of European rabbits.  The rabbits destroyed huge expanses of Australia and threatened the sheep and cattle industries. 
  In 1950, myxoma virus, a parasite that affects rabbits, 
was deliberately introduced into Australia to control the rabbit population.  Spread rapidly by mosquitoes, the virus devastated the rabbit population.
 The virus was less deadly to the offspring of surviving rabbits, however, and it caused less and less harm over the years. Apparently, genotypes (the genetic make-up of an organism) 
in the rabbit population were selected that were better able to resist the parasite. Meanwhile, the deadliest strains of the virus perished with their hosts as natural selection favored 
strains that could infect hosts but not kill them. Thus, natural selection stabilized this host-parasite relationship.

In contrast to parasitism, in commensalism, one partner benefits without significantly affecting the other. Few cases of absolute commensalism probably exist, because it is unlikely that one of the partners will be completely unaffected. Commensal associations sometimes involve one species' obtaining food that is inadvertently exposed by another. For instance, several kinds of birds feed on insects flushed out of the grass by grazing cattle. It is difficult to imagine how this could affect the cattle, but the relationship may help or hinder them in some way not yet recognized.
The third type of symbiosis, mutualism, benefits both partners in the relationship Legume plants and their nitrogen-fixing bacteria, and the interactions between flowering plants and their pollinators, are examples of mutualistic association. In the first case, the plants provide the bacteria with carbohydrates and other organic compounds, and the bacteria have enzymes that act as catalysts that eventually add nitrogen to the soil, enriching it. In the second case, pollinators (insects, birds) obtain food from the flowering plant, and the plant has its pollen distributed and seeds dispersed much more efficiently than they would be if they were carried by the wind only. Another example of mutualism would be the bull's horn acacia tree, which grows in Central and South America. The tree provides a place to live for ants of the genus Pseudomyrmex. The ants live in large, hollow thorns and eat sugar secreted by the tree. The ants also eat yellow structures at the tip of leaflets: these are protein rich and seem to have no function for the tree except to attract ants. The ants benefit the host tree by attacking virtually anything that touches it. They sting other insects and large herbivores (animals that eat only plants) and even clip surrounding vegetation that grows near the tree. When the ants are removed, the trees usually die, probably because herbivores damage them so much that they are unable to compete with surrounding vegetation for light and growing space.
The complex interplay of species in symbiotic relationships highlights an important point about communities: Their structure depends on a web of diverse connections among organisms.
 
Which of the following statements about commensalism can be inferred from paragraph 1?
It excludes interactions between more than two species.
It makes it less likely for species within a community to survive.
Its significance to the organization of biological communities is small.
Its role in the structure of biological populations is a disruptive one.
The word derives in the passage is closest in meaning to
Digests
Obtains
Controls
Discovers
According to paragraph 2. which of the following is true of the action of natural selection on hosts and parasites?
Hosts benefit more from natural selection than parasites do.
Both aggression in predators and defensive capacities in hosts are favored for species survival.
The ability to make toxic chemicals enables a parasite to find and isolate its host.
Larger size equips a parasite to prey on smaller host organisms.
The word devastated in the passage is closest in meaning to
Influenced
Infected
strengthened
destroyed
Which of the following can be concluded from the discussion in paragraph 3 about the Australian rabbit population?
Human intervention may alter the host, the parasite. and the relationship between them.
The risks of introducing outside organisms into a biological community are not worth the benefits.
Humans should not interfere in host-parasite relationships.
Organisms that survive a parasitic attack do so in spite of the natural selection process.
According to paragraph 3, all of the following characterize the way natural selection stabilized the Australian rabbit population EXCEPT:
The most toxic viruses died with their hosts.
The surviving rabbits were increasingly immune to the virus.
The decline of the mosquito population caused the spread of the virus to decline.
Rabbits with specific genetic make-ups were favored.
The word inadvertently in the passage is closest in meaning to
Indefensibly
Substantially
Unintentionally
Partially
According to paragraph 5, the relationship between legumes and bacteria benefits the soil by
adding enriching carbohydrates
speeding the decay of organic matter
destroying enzymes that pollute it
contributing nitrogen to it
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
The relationship between flowering plants and pollinators provides pollinators with food and flowers with efficient reproduction.
In some cases birds obtain food from the seeds that are dispersed in the wind.
The wind not only helps the flowers distribute their seeds but enables birds to find more food.
Animals and insects are more effective in distributing pollen and seeds than the wind.
According to paragraph 5. which of the following is NOT true of the relationship between the bull's horn acacia tree and the Pseudomyrmex ants?
Ants defend the host trees against the predatory actions of insects and animals.
The acacia trees are a valuable source of nutrition for the ants.
The ants enable the acacia tree to produce its own chemical defenses.
The ants protect the acacia from having to compete with surrounding vegetation.
The word highlights in the passage is closest in meaning to
Defines
Emphasizes
Reflects
Suggests
What is the main purpose of this passage?
To explain the concept of symbiosis by expanded descriptions of its principal types
To make a comparison between human relationships and symbiotic interactions in the natural world
To demonstrate the unforeseen benefits of natural processes that at first seem wholly destructive
To argue that parasitism is a problem that can be solved by scientific intervention

Trade was the mainstay of the urban economy in the Middle East, as caravans negotiated the surrounding desert, restricted only by access to water and by mountain ranges. This has been so since ancient times, partly due to the geology of the area, which is mostly limestone and sandstone, with few deposits of metallic ore and other useful materials. Ancient demands for obsidian (a black volcanic rock useful for making mirrors and tools) led to trade with Armenia to the north, while jade for cutting tools was brought from Turkistan, and the precious stone lapis lazuli was imported from Afghanistan. One can trace such expeditions back to ancient Sumeria, the earliest known Middle Eastern civilization. Records show merchant caravans and trading posts set up by the Sumerians in the surrounding mountains and deserts of Persia and Arabia, where they traded grain for raw materials, such as timber and stones, as well as for metals and gems.
Reliance on trade had several important consequences.  Production was generally in the hands of skilled individual artisans doing piecework under the tutelage of a master who was also the shop owner. In these shops differences of rank were blurred as artisans and masters labored side by side in the same modest establishment, were usually members of the same guild and religious sect, lived in the same neighborhoods, and often had assumed (or real) kinship relationships.  The worker was bound to the master by a mutual contract that either one could repudiate, and the relationship was conceptualized as one of partnership.  
This mode of craft production favored the growth of self-governing and ideologically egalitarian craft guilds everywhere in the Middle Eastern city. These were essentially professional associations that provided for the mutual aid and protection of their members, and allowed for the maintenance of professional standards. The growth of independent guilds was furthered by the fact that surplus was not a result of domestic craft production but resulted primarily from international trading; the government left working people to govern themselves, much as shepherds of tribal confederacies were left alone by their leaders. In the multiplicity of small-scale local egalitarian or quasi-egalitarian organizations for fellowship, worship, and production that flourished in this laissez-faire environment, individuals could interact with one another within a community of harmony and ideological equality, following their own popularly elected leaders and governing themselves by shared consensus while minimizing distinctions of wealth and power.
The mercantile economy was also characterized by a peculiar moral stance that is typical of people who live by tradean attitude that is individualistic, calculating, risk taking, and adaptive to circumstances. As among tribes people, personal relationships and a careful weighing of character have always been crucial in a mercantile economy with little regulation, where one's word is one's bond and where informal ties of trust cement together an international trade network. Nor have merchants and artisans ever had much tolerance for aristocratic professions of moral superiority, favoring instead an egalitarian ethic of the open market, where steady hard work, the loyalty of one's fellows, and entrepreneurial skill make all the difference. And, like the pastoralists, Middle Eastern merchants and artisans unhappy with their environment could simply pack up and leave for greener pasturesan act of self-assertion wholly impossible in most other civilizations throughout history.
Dependence on long-distance trade also meant that the great empires of the Middle East were built both literally and figuratively on shifting sand. The central state, though often very rich and very populous, was intrinsically fragile, since the development of new international trade routes could undermine the monetary base and erode state power, as occurred when European seafarers circumvented Middle Eastern merchants after Vasco da  Gama's voyage around Africa in the late fifteenth century opened up a southern route. The ecology of the region also permitted armed predators to prowl the surrounding barrens, which were almost impossible for a state to control. Peripheral peoples therefore had a great advantage in their dealings with the center, making government authority insecure and anxious.
 
According to paragraph 1, why has trade been so important throughout the history of the Middle East
The rare and valuable metals and stones found in Middle Eastern deserts have always been in high demand in surrounding areas.
Growing conditions throughout the Middle East are generally poor, forcing Middle Eastern people to depend on imported grain.
Many useful and decorative raw materials cannot be found naturally in the Middle East but are available from neighboring regions.
Frequent travel, due to limited water supplies in the Middle East, created many opportunities for trade with neighboring societies.
The word repudiate in the passage is closest in meaning to
respect
reject
review
revise
According to paragraph 2, how did Middle Eastern shop owners treat their workers?
Workers were ranked according to their skill level, with the most-experienced artisans becoming partial owners of the shop.
Shop owners treated different workers differently depending on how much the workers had in common with their masters.
Workers were bound to their masters by unbreakable contracts that strictly defined the terms of their partnership.
The shop owner worked alongside the workers and often considered them partner and members of the family.
The author includes the information that surplus was not a result of domestic craft production but resulted primarily from international trading in order to
support the claim that the mode of production made possible by the craft guilds was very good for trade
contrast the economic base of the city government with that of the tribal confederacies
provide a reason why the government allowed the guilds to be self-controlled
suggest that the government was missing out on a valuable opportunity to tax the guilds
According to paragraph 3, all of the following are true of the Middle Eastern craft guilds EXCEPT:
The guilds were created to support workers and to uphold principles of high-quality craft production.
Each guild was very large and included members from a broad geographic area.
The leaders of the guilds were chosen by popular vote.
All guild members were treated as equals.
The word consensus in the passage is closest in meaning to
authority
responsibility
custom
agreement
According to paragraph 4, which of the following was NOT necessary for success in the mercantile economy?
Good business sense
Reliable associates
Family wealth
Constant effort
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Tribes people were comfortable forming personal relationships with merchants, who, like them, were bound by their promises to one another.
Because trade was not formally regulated, merchants were careful about whom they trusted and often conducted business with people they knew personally.
While trade among merchants relied somewhat on regulation, among tribes people trade was based on personal relationships and careful character evaluation.
Because tribes people were bound only by their promises to one another, personal relationships were formed only after careful weighing of character.
The word ethic in the passage is closest in meaning to
set of moral principles
division of labor
economic system
test of character
According to paragraph 4, what choice did Middle Eastern merchants and artisans have that many other people have not had?
If they were unhappy in the mercantile environment, they could draw on personal connections to find a different kind of work.
They were allowed to assert their opinions without having to listen to aristocratic professions of moral superiority.
Following the example of the pastoralists, they could demand, and receive, better working conditions.
If they didn't like their environment, they could move somewhere else.
The word intrinsically in the passage is closest in meaning to
fundamentally
surprisingly
consequently
particularly
In paragraph 5, why does the author mention the new trade route opened up by Vasco da Gama's fifteenth century voyage around Africa?
To provide evidence that European seafarers took every opportunity to bypass Middle Eastern merchants
To present an instance in which Middle Eastern states lost money and power because of their reliance on long-distance trade
To argue this new route became necessary when European seafarers wanted to avoid Middle Eastern states whose central power had begun to erode
To explain how da Gama helped European traders avoid the dangerous predators prowling the areas surrounding Middle Eastern cities

Archaeologists distinguish the cultural formation processes of the archaeological record (those involving some kind of human activity) from the natural formation processes (those involving nonhuman activity, such as river action disturbing archaeological material). There are two kinds of cultural formation processes: those that reflect the original human behavior and activity before a find or site became buried, and those (such as looting) that came after burial. Of course, most major archaeological sites are formed as the result of a complex sequence of use, burial, and reuse so that a simple twofold division of cultural formation processes may not be so simple to apply in practice, but the distinction is still useful.
Original human behavior is often reflected archaeologically in at least four major activities. In the case of a tool, for example, there may be (1) acquisition of the raw material, (2) manufacture, (3) use, and (4) disposal or discard when the tool is worn out or broken. (The tool may of course be reworked and recycled, thus repeating stages 2 and 3.) Similarly, a food crop such as wheat will be acquired (harvested), manufactured (processed), used (eaten), and discarded (digested and the waste products excreted), although here one might add a common intermediate stage of storage before use. From the archaeologist's point of view, the critical factor is that remains can enter the archaeological record at any one of these stages. A tool may be lost or thrown out for being of inferior quality during manufacture, or a crop may be accidentally burnt and thus preserved during processing. In order to reconstruct the original activity accurately it is therefore crucial to try to understand which of the stages one is looking at. It may be quite easy to identify the first stage for stone tools, for instance, because stone quarries can often be recognized by deep holes in the ground with piles of associated waste flakes that survive well. But it is much more difficult to know beyond reasonable doubt where a sample of charred plant remains comes from, whether from an area where harvested wheat was taken for threshing or from the area where the grain was eaten. This may also make it difficult to reconstruct the true plant diet, since certain activities may favor the preservation of certain species of plant.
Deliberate burial of valuables or the dead is another human behavior that has left its mark on the archaeological record. In times of conflict or war, people often deposit prized possessions in the ground, intending to reclaim them at a later date; but sometimes, for one reason or another, they fail to do so. These hoards are a prime source of evidence for certain periods, such as the European Bronze Age, for which hoards of metal goods are common, or later Roman Britain, which has yielded buried treasures of silver and other precious metals. The archaeologist, however, may not find it easy to distinguish between hoards originally intended to be reclaimed and valuables buriedperhaps as offerings to supernatural powerswith no reclamation intended.
In addition to burial hoards, a major source of archaeological evidence comes from burial of the dead, whether in simple graves, elaborate burial mounds, or giant pyramids, usually with grave goods such as ceramic vessels or weapons, and sometimes with painted tomb-chamber walls, as in ancient Mexico or Egypt. The Egyptians indeed went so far as to mummify their deadto preserve them, they hoped, for eternityas did the Incas of Peru, whose kings were kept in the Temple of the Sun at Cuzco and brought outside for special ceremonies.
Human destruction of the archaeological record might be caused by burials of the kind just described being dug into earlier deposits. But people in the past deliberately or accidentally obliterated traces of their predecessors in innumerable other ways. Rulers often destroyed monuments or erased inscriptions belonging to previous chiefs or monarchs.  On the other hand, some human destruction meant to obliterate has inadvertently preserved material for the archaeologist to find.  Burning, for example, may not always destroy.  Clay daubing and adobe usually decay, but if a structure has been burned, the mud is baked to the consistency of a brick. 
 
Paragraph 1 supports which of the following about the two types of cultural formation processes?
An understanding of the twofold division of cultural formation processes has no practical significance.
Many finds at major archaeological sites reflect both types of cultural formation processes.
The two types of cultural formation processes can be most clearly distinguished from each other at major archaeological sites.
Cultural formation processes that took place before a find became buried are usually less complex than cultural formation processes that occurred after it was buried.
The word distinction in the passage is closest in meaning to
differentiation
importance
decision
conflict
The author indicates that A tool may be lost or thrown out for being of inferior quality during manufacture, or a crop may be accidentally burnt and thus preserved during processing in order to
show that the stages typically found in tool making are also found in food production
explain the differences between the four major stages typical of human behavior
illustrate the point that remains can enter the archaeological record at any stage
provide examples of human activity rarely found in archaeological sites
According to paragraph 2, archaeologists trying to reconstruct human activity in a given area find that
many areas used as sources of raw materials for tools seem to have been later used for food production
areas used to obtain raw materials for tools can be easier to identify than areas used for food production or occupation
there is usually more waste associated with food production than with tool manufacturing
it is generally easier to reconstruct peoples plant diets than diets of animal sources
According to paragraph 3, a common problem for archaeologists dealing with hoards is
estimating the age of buried metals
understanding why certain metals like silver are commonly found in hoards
understanding how the use of hoards as offerings to supernatural powers spread outside Europe
identifying the reason that the valuables were buried
According to paragraph 4, the archaeological record shows that people buried their dead in each of the following EXCEPT
burial mounds
simple graves
ceramic containers
large pyramids
According to paragraph 4, the ancient Egyptians and the Incas of Peru were alike in that they both
frequently changed the location of their kings' burial sites
left little evidence of grave goods being used in burial sites
preserved their dead
held special ceremonies at the graves of their kings
The word inadvertently in the passage is closest in meaning to
instead
accidentally
fortunately
permanently

The periodic table is a chart that reflects the periodic recurrence of chemical and physical properties of the elements when the elements are arranged in order of increasing atomic number(the number of protons in the nucleus). It is a monumental scientific achievement, and its development illustrates the essential interplay between observation, prediction, and testing required for scientific progress. In the 1800's scientists were searching for new elements. By the late 1860's more than 60 chemical elements had been identified,and much was known about their descriptive chemistry. Various proposals were put forth to arrange the elements into groups based on similarities in chemical and physical properties.  The next step was to recognize a connection between group properties (physical or chemical similarities) and atomic mass (the measured mass of an individual atom of an element). When the elements known at the time were ordered by increasing atomic mass, it was found that successive elements belonged to different chemical groups and that the order of the groups in this sequence was fixed and repeated itself at regular intervals.  Thus when the series of elements was written so as to begin a new horizontal row with each alkali metal,elements of the same groups were automatically assembled in vertical columns in a periodic table of the elements.  This table was the forerunner of the modern table.
When the German chemist Lothar Meyer and (independently) the Russian Dmitry Mendeleyev first introduced the periodic table in 1869-70, one-third of the naturally occurring chemical elements had not yet been discovered. Yet both chemists were sufficiently farsighted to leave gaps where their analyses of periodic physical and chemical properties indicated that new elements should be located. Mendeleyev was bolder than Meyer and even assumed that if a measured atomic mass put an element in the wrong place in the table, the atomic mass was wrong. In some cases this was true. Indium, for example, had previously been assigned an atomic mass between those of arsenic and selenium. Because there is no space in the periodic table between these two elements, Mendeleyev suggested that the atomic mass of indium be changed to a completely different value, where it would fill an empty space between cadmium and tin. In fact, subsequent work has shown that in a periodic table, elements should not be ordered strictly by atomic mass. For example, tellurium comes before iodine in the periodic table, even though its atomic mass is slightly greater. Such anomalies are due to the relative abundance of the "isotopes" or varieties of each element. All the isotopes of a given element have the same number of protons, but differ in their number of neutrons, and hence in their atomic mass. The isotopes of a given element have the same chemical properties but slightly different physical properties. We now know that atomic number (the number of protons in the nucleus), not atomic mass number (the number of protons and neutrons), determines chemical behavior.
Mendeleyev went further than Meyer in another respect: he predicted the properties of six elements yet to be discovered. For example, a gap just below aluminum suggested a new element would be found with properties analogous to those of aluminum. Mendeleyev designated this element "eka-aluminum" (eka is the Sanskrit word for  "next") and predicted its properties. Just five years later an element with the proper atomic mass was isolated and named gallium by its discoverer. The close correspondence between the observed properties of gallium and Mendeleyev's predictions for eka-aluminum lent strong support to the periodic law. Additional support came in 1885 when eka-silicon, which had also been described in advance by Mendeleyev, was discovered and named germanium.
The structure of the periodic table appeared to limit the number of possible elements. It was therefore quite surprising when John William Strut( Lord Rayleigh, discovered a gaseous element in 1894 that did not fit into the previous classification scheme. A century earlier, Henry Cavendish had noted the existence of a residual gas when oxygen and nitrogen are removed from air, but its importance had not been realized. Together with William Ramsay, Rayleigh isolated the gas (separating it from other substances into its pure state) and named it argon. Ramsay then studied a gas that was present in natural gas deposits and discovered that it was helium, an element whose presence in the Sun had been noted earlier in the spectrum of sunlight but that had not previously been known on Earth. Rayleigh and Ramsay postulated the existence of a new group of elements, and in 1898 other members of the series (neon, krypton, and xenon) were isolated.
 
The phrase interplay in the passage is closest in meaning to
sequence
interpretation
requirement
interaction
According to paragraph 1, what pattern did scientists notice when the known elements were written in order of increasing atomic mass?
The elements of the group of alkali metals were the first elements in the order of increasing atomic mass.
Repetition of the same atomic masses for elements in different groups appeared.
Elements with similar chemical properties appeared in the listing at regular intervals.
Elements were chemically most similar to those just before and after them in the order.
In paragraph 2, what is the author's purpose in presenting the information about the decision by Meyer and Mendeleyev to leave gaps in the periodic table?
To illustrate their confidence that the organizing principles of the periodic table would govern the occurrence of all chemical elements
To indicate that some of their analyses of periodic physical and chemical properties were later found to be wrong
To support the idea that they were unwilling to place new elements in the periodic table
To indicate how they handled their disagreement about where to place new elements
What reason does the author provide for the claim that Mendeleyev was bolder than Meyer?
Mendeleyev corrected incorrect information Meyer had proposed.
Mendeleyev assumed that some information believed to be true about the elements was incorrect.
Mendeleyev argued that Meyer had not left enough gaps in the periodic table.
Mendeleyev realized that elements were not ordered by atomic mass in the periodic table.
According to paragraph 2, why did Mendeleyev suggest changing the atomic mass of indium?
Because indium did not fit into the periodic table in the place predicted by its atomic mass.
Because there was experimental evidence that the atomic mass that had been assigned to indium was incorrect.
Because there was an empty space between cadmium and tin in the periodic table.
Because the chemical properties of indium were similar to those of arsenic and selenium.
It can be inferred from paragraph 2 that tellurium comes before iodine in the periodic table even though tellurium's atomic mass is slightly greater because
iodine is less common than tellurium
both iodine and tellurium have no isotopes
the chemical behavior of tellurium is highly variable
the atomic number of tellurium is smaller than that of iodine
The phrase abundance in the passage is closest in meaning to
weight
requirement
plenty
sequence
The phrase analogous to in the passage is closest in meaning to
predicted by
expected of
similar to
superior to
Paragraph 3 suggests that Mendeleyev predicted the properties of eka-aluminum on the basis of
the atomic mass of aluminum
the position of the gap in the periodic table that eka-aluminum was predicted to fill
the similarity of eka-aluminum to the other five missing elements
observation of the properties of gallium
It can be inferred from paragraph 3 that the significance of the discovery of gallium was that it supported which of the following?
The idea that aluminum was correctly placed in the periodic table.
Mendeleyev's prediction that eka-silicon would be discovered next.
The organizing principle of the periodic table.
The idea that unknown elements existed.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Ramsay found evidence of helium in the spectrum of sunlight before he discovered that the element was also contained in natural gas deposits on Earth.
Ramsay thought he had discovered a new element present in natural gas deposits, but he was wrong since that element had been previously observed elsewhere on Earth.
After Ramsay had discovered a new element, called helium, in natural gas deposits on Earth, he also found evidence of its presence in the Sun.
Ramsay later discovered that helium, an element that was already known to be present in the Sun, was also present in natural gas deposits on Earth.
The word postulated in the passage is closest in meaning to
hypothesized
discovered
reported
generated

When it comes to physiology, the leatherback turtle is, in some ways, more like a reptilian whale than a turtle. It swims farther into the cold of the northern and southern oceans than any other sea turtle, and it deals with the chilly waters in a way unique among reptiles.
A warm-blooded turtle may seem to be a contradiction in terms. Nonetheless, an adult leatherback can maintain a body temperature of between 25 and 26C (77-79F) in seawater that is only 8C (46.4F). Accomplishing this feat requires adaptations both to generate heat in the turtles body and to keep it from escaping into the surrounding waters. Leatherbacks apparently do not generate internal heat the way we do, or the way birds do, as a by-product of cellular metabolism. A leatherback may be able to pick up some body heat by basking at the surface; its dark, almost black body color may help it to absorb solar radiation. However, most of its internal heat comes from the action of its muscles.
Leatherbacks keep their body heat in three different ways. The first, and simplest, is size. The bigger the animal is, the lower its surface-to-volume ratio; for every ounce of body mass, there is proportionately less surface through which heat can escape. An adult leatherback is twice the size of the biggest cheloniid sea turtles and will therefore take longer to cool off. Maintaining a high body temperature through sheer bulk is called gigantothermy.  It works for elephants, for whales, and, perhaps, it worked for many of the larger dinosaurs.  It apparently works, in a smaller way, for some other sea turtles.  Large loggerhead and green turtles can maintain their body temperature at a degree or two above that of the surrounding water, and gigantothermy is probably the way they do it.  Muscular activity helps, too, and an actively swimming green turtle may be 7C (12.6F) warmer than the waters it swims through.
Gigantothermy, though, would not be enough to keep a leatherback warm in cold northern waters. It is not enough for whales, which supplement it with a thick layer of insulating blubber (fat). Leatherbacks do not have blubber, but they do have a reptilian equivalent: thick, oil-saturated skin, with a layer of fibrous, fatty tissue just beneath it. Insulation protects the leatherback everywhere but on its head and flippers. Because the flippers are comparatively thin and blade-like, they are the one part of the leatherback that is likely to become chilled. There is not much that the turtle can do about this without compromising the aerodynamic shape of the flipper. The problem is that as blood flows through the turtles flippers, it risks losing enough heat to lower the animals central body temperature when it returns. The solution is to allow the flippers to cool down without drawing heat away from the rest of the turtles body. The leatherback accomplishes this by arranging the blood vessels in the base of its flipper into a countercurrent exchange system.
In a countercurrent exchange system, the blood vessels carrying cooled blood from the flippers run close enough to the blood vessels carrying warm blood from the body to pick up some heat from the warmer blood vessels; thus, the heat is transferred from the outgoing to the ingoing vessels before it reaches the flipper itself. This is the same arrangement found in an old-fashioned steam radiator, in which the coiled pipes pass heat back and forth as water courses through them. The leatherback is certainly not the only animal with such an arrangement; gulls have a countercurrent exchange in their legs. That is why a gull can stand on an ice floe without freezing.
All this applies, of course, only to an adult leatherback. Hatchlings are simply too small to conserve body heat, even with insulation and countercurrent exchange systems. We do not know how old, or how large, a leatherback has to be before it can switch from a cold-blooded to a warm-blooded mode of life. Leatherbacks reach their immense size in a much shorter time than it takes other sea turtles to grow. Perhaps their rush to adulthood is driven by a simple need to keep warm.
 
The phrase unique among in the passage is closest in meaning to
natural to
different from all other
quite common among
familiar to
What can be inferred about whales from paragraph 1?
They are considered by some to be reptiles.
Their bodies are built in a way that helps them manage extremely cold temperatures.
They are distantly related to leatherback turtles.
They can swim farther than leatherback turtles.
The word feat in the passage is closest in meaning to
remarkable achievement
common transformation
daily activity
complex solution
Paragraph 2 mentions all of the following as true about the body heat of adult leatherback turtles EXCEPT:
Their muscles produce heat for maintaining body temperature.
Their dark bodies help trap solar radiation.
Their cellular metabolism produces heat as a by-product.
Basking at the waters surface helps them obtain heat.
The word bulk in the passage is closest in meaning to
strength
effort
activity
mass
The word it in paragraph 4 refers to
the problem
blood
the turtle
body temperature
According to paragraph 4, which of the following features enables the leatherback turtle to stay warm?
An insulating layer of blubber
A thick, oily skin covering fatty tissue
The aerodynamic shape of its flippers
A well-insulated head
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
In a turtle's countercurrent exchange system, outgoing vessels lie near enough to ingoing ones that heat can be exchanged from the former to the latter before reaching the turtle's flippers.
Within the turtle's flippers, there is a countercurrent exchange system that allows colder blood vessels to absorb heat from nearby warmer blood vessels and then return warmed blood to the turtle's body.
In a countercurrent exchange system, a turtle can pick up body heat from being close enough to other turtles, thus raising its blood temperature as it passes them.
When a turtle places its flippers close to its body, it is able to use its countercurrent exchange system to transfer heat from the warmer blood vessels in its body to the cooler blood vessels in its flippers.
Why does the author mention old-fashioned steam radiator in the discussion of countercurrent exchange systems?
To argue that a turtle's central heating system is not as highly evolved as that of other warm-blooded animals
To provide a useful comparison with which to illustrate how a countercurrent exchange system works
To suggest that steam radiators were modeled after the sophisticated heating system of turtles
To establish the importance of the movement of water in countercurrent exchange systems
The phrase courses through in the passage is closest in meaning to
rises through
heats up in
runs through
collects in
According to paragraph 6, which of the following statements is most accurate about young leatherback turtles?
They lack the countercurrent exchange systems that develop in adulthood.
Their rate of growth is slower than that of other sea turtles.
They lose heat easily even with insulation and countercurrent exchange systems.
They switch between cold-blooded and warm-blooded modes throughout their hatchling stage.

 Cases in which many species become extinct within a geologically short interval of time are called mass extinctions.  There was one such event at the end of the Cretaceous period (around 70 million years ago).  There was another, even larger, mass extinction at the end of the Permian period (around 250 million years ago).  The Permian event has attracted much less attention than other mass extinctions because mostly unfamiliar species perished at that time.
The fossil record shows at least five mass extinctions in which many families of marine organisms died out. The rates of extinction happening today are as great as the rates during these mass extinctions. Many scientists have therefore concluded that a sixth great mass extinction is currently in progress.
What could cause such high rates of extinction? There are several hypotheses, including warming or cooling of Earth, changes in seasonal fluctuations or ocean currents, and changing positions of the continents. Biological hypotheses include ecological changes brought about by the evolution of cooperation between insects and flowering plants or of bottom-feeding predators in the oceans. Some of the proposed mechanisms required a very brief period during which all extinctions suddenly took place; other mechanisms would be more likely to have taken place more gradually, over an extended period, or at different times on different continents. Some hypotheses fail to account for simultaneous extinctions on land and in the seas. Each mass extinction may have had a different cause. Evidence points to hunting by humans and habitat destruction as the likely causes for the current mass extinction.
American paleontologists David Raup and John Sepkoski, who have studied extinction rates in a number of fossil groups, suggest that episodes of increased extinction have recurred periodically, approximately every 26 million years since the mid-Cretaceous period. The late Cretaceous extinction of the dinosaurs and ammonoids was just one of the more drastic in a whole series of such recurrent extinction episodes. The possibility that mass extinctions may recur periodically has given rise to such hypotheses as that of a companion star with a long-period orbit deflecting other bodies from their normal orbits, making some of them fall to Earth as meteors and causing widespread devastation upon impact.
Of the various hypotheses attempting to account for the late Cretaceous extinctions, the one that has attracted the most attention in recent years is the asteroid-impact hypothesis first suggested by Luis and Walter Alvarez. According to this hypothesis, Earth collided with an asteroid with an estimated diameter of 10 kilometers, or with several asteroids, the combined mass of which was comparable. The force of collision spewed large amounts of debris into the atmosphere, darkening the skies for several years before the finer particles settled. The reduced level of photosynthesis led to a massive decline in plant life of all kinds, and this caused massive starvation first of herbivores and subsequently of carnivores. The mass extinction would have occurred very suddenly under this hypothesis.
One interesting test of the Alvarez hypothesis is based on the presence of the rare-earth element iridium (Ir). Earths crust contains very little of this element, but most asteroids contain a lot more. Debris thrown into the atmosphere by an asteroid collision would presumably contain large amounts of iridium, and atmospheric currents would carry this material all over the globe. A search of sedimentary deposits that span the boundary between the Cretaceous and Tertiary periods shows that there is a dramatic increase in the abundance of iridium briefly and precisely at this boundary. This iridium anomaly offers strong support for the Alvarez hypothesis even though no asteroid itself has ever been recovered.
An asteroid of this size would be expected to leave an immense crater, even if the asteroid itself was disintegrated by the impact. The intense heat of the impact would produce heat-shocked quartz in many types of rock. Also, large blocks thrown aside by the impact would form secondary craters surrounding the main crater. To date, several such secondary craters have been found along Mexicos Yucatan Peninsula, and heat-shocked quartz has been found both in Mexico and in Haiti. A location called Chicxulub, along the Yucatan coast, has been suggested as the primary impact site.
 
Paragraph 1 supports which of the following statements about mass extinctions?
They take place over a period of 70 million years.
They began during the Cretaceous period.
They eliminate many animal species that exist at the time they occur.
They occur every 250 million years.
According to paragraph 2, scientists base their belief that a mass extinction is going on at present on which of the following?
The speed with which mass extinctions are happening today is similar to the speed of past extinctions.
The number of species that have died out since the last extinction event is extremely large.
Mass extinctions occur with regularity and it is time for another one.
Fossil records of many marine species have disappeared.
The word "extended" in the passage is closest in meaning to
specific
unlimited
reasonable
long
According to paragraph 3, each of the following has been proposed as a possible cause of mass extinctions EXCEPT
habitat destruction
continental movement
fierce interspecies competition
changes in Earth's temperature
Paragraph 3 supports which of the following ideas about mass extinctions?
Scientists know the exact causes of most mass extinctions.
Mass extinctions are unlikely to happen again in the future.
Insects, flowering plants, and bottom-feeding predators in the oceans tend to be the first organisms to disappear during episodes of mass extinctions.
Some mass extinctions occurred on land and in the seas at the same time.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Based on their studies of extinction rates of numerous fossil groups, paleontologists David Raup and John Sepkoski have determined that mass extinctions occur about every 26 million years.
David Raup and John Sepkoski studied extinction rates of numerous fossil groups and suggest that mass extinctions during the Cretaceous period continued for 26 million years.
Studies that paleontologists David Raup and John Sepkoski conducted of various fossil groups have revealed that extinction rates have increased over the past 26 million years.
The studies conducted by paleontologists David Raup and John Sepkoski of the fossil remains of species suggest that the extinction rate of species started to increase by the middle of the Cretaceous period.
According to paragraph 4, what aspect of extinction episodes does the companion-star hypothesis supposedly clarify?
Their location
Their frequency
Their duration
Their severity
The phrase "account for" in the passage is closest in meaning to
describe
challenge
explain
test
According to paragraph 6, what made iridium a useful test of the Alvarez hypothesis?
Its occurrence in a few locations on Earth against several locations on other planets
Its occurrence in limited quantities on Earth against its abundance in asteroids
Its ability to remain solid at extremely high temperatures
Its ease of detection even in very small amounts
In stating that "no asteroid itself has ever been recovered", the author emphasizes which of the following?
The importance of the indirect evidence for a large asteroid
The fact that no evidence supports the asteroid impact hypothesis
The reason many researchers reject the Alvarez hypothesis
The responsibility of scientists for not making the effort to discover the asteroid itself
The word "intense" in the passage is closest in meaning to
sudden
unusual
immediate
extreme
What is the purpose of paragraph 7 in the passage?
It proposes a decisive new test of the Alvarez hypothesis.
It presents additional supporting evidence for the Alvarez hypothesis.
It explains why evidence relating to the Alvarez hypothesis is hard to find.
It shows how recent evidence has raised doubts about the Alvarez hypothesis.

Glaciers are slowly moving masses of ice that have accumulated on land in areas where more snowfalls during a year than melts. Snow falls as hexagonal crystals, but once on the ground, snow is soon transformed into a compacted mass of smaller, rounded grains.  As the air space around them is lessened by compaction and melting, the grains become denser.  With further melting, refreezing, and increased weight from newer snowfall above, the snow reaches a granular recrystallized stage intermediate between flakes and ice known as firn.  With additional time, pressure, and refrozen meltwater from above, the small firn granules become larger, interlocked crystals of blue glacial ice.  When the ice is thick enough, usually over 30 meters, the weight of the snow and firn will cause the ice crystals toward the bottom to become plastic and to flow outward or downward from the area of snow accumulation.
Glaciers are open systems, with snow as the systems input and meltwater as the system's main output. The glacial system is governed by two basic climatic variables: precipitation and temperature. For a glacier to grow or maintain its mass, there must be sufficient snowfall to match or exceed the annual loss through melting, evaporation, and calving, which occurs when the glacier loses solid chunks as icebergs to the sea or to large lakes. If summer temperatures are high for too long, then all the snowfall from the previous winter will melt. Surplus snowfall is essential for a glacier to develop. A surplus allows snow to accumulate and for the pressure of snow accumulated over the years to transform buried snow into glacial ice with a depth great enough for the ice to flow. Glaciers are sometimes classified by temperature as faster-flowing temperate glaciers or as slower-flowing polar glaciers.
Glaciers are part of Earths hydrologic cycle and are second only to the oceans in the total amount of water contained. About 2 percent of Earths water is currently frozen as ice. Two percent may be a deceiving figure, however, since over 80 percent of the worlds freshwater is locked up as ice in glaciers, with the majority of it in Antarctica. The total amount of ice is even more awesome if we estimate the water released upon the hypothetical melting of the worlds glaciers. Sea level would rise about 60 meters. This would change the geography of the planet considerably. In contrast, should another ice age occur, sea level would drop drastically. During the last ice age, sea level dropped about 120 meters.
When snowfalls on high mountains or in polar regions, it may become part of the glacial system. Unlike rain, which returns rapidly to the sea or atmosphere, the snow that becomes part of a glacier is involved in a much more slowly cycling system. Here water may be stored in ice form for hundreds or even hundreds of thousands of years before being released again into the liquid water system as meltwater. In the meantime, however, this ice is not static. Glaciers move slowly across the land with tremendous energy, carving into even the hardest rock formations and thereby reshaping the landscape as they engulf, push, drag, and finally deposit rock debris in places far from its original location. As a result, glaciers create a great variety of landforms that remain long after the surface is released from its icy covering.
Throughout most of Earths history, glaciers did not exist, but at the present time about 10 percent of Earths land surface is covered by glaciers. Present-day glaciers are found in Antarctica, in Greenland, and at high elevations on all the continents except Australia. In the recent past, from about 2.4 million to about 10,000 years ago, nearly a third of Earths land area was periodically covered by ice thousands of meters thick. In the much more distant past, other ice ages have occurred.
 
The word interlocked in the passage is closest in meaning to
intermediate
linked
frozen
fully developed
According to paragraph 1, which of the following does NOT describe a stage in the development of firn?
Hexagonal crystals become larger and interlock to form a thick layer.
Snow crystals become compacted into grains.
Granules recrystallize after melting, refreezing, and further compaction.
Grains become denser owing to reduced air space around them.
The word match in the passage is closest in meaning to
measure
enlarge
approximate
equal
The word transform in the passage is closest in meaning to
break
push
change
extend
According to paragraph 2, surplus snow affects a glacier in all the following ways EXCEPT:
It provides the pressure needed to cause glacial ice to flow.
It offsets losses of ice due to melting, evaporation, and calving.
It brings about the formation of firn in the snow it buries.
It results in temperate glaciers that are thicker than polar glaciers.
Paragraph 2 implies that which of the following conditions produces the fastest moving glaciers?
A climate characteristic of the polar regions
A thick layer of ice in a temperate climate
Long, warm summers
Snow, firn, and ice that have been buried for several years
The word deceiving in the passage is closest in meaning to
approximate
exaggerated
unusual
misleading
Why does the author consider "the hypothetical melting of the world's glaciers"?
To contrast the effects of this event with the opposite effects of a new ice age
To emphasize how much water is frozen in glaciers
To illustrate the disastrous effects of a warming trend
To support the claim that glaciers are part of Earth's hydrologic cycle
The discussion in paragraph 3 answers all the following questions EXCEPT:
Where is most of Earth's freshwater?
What effect would a new ice age have on sea levels?
What is the total amount of water in Earth's oceans?
How much of Earth's water is in ice?
The word static in the passage is closest in meaning to
unchanging
usable
thick
harmless
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
As a glacier moves, it leaves behind rock formations that have been engulfed, pushed, and dragged by the glacier.
Glaciers reshape the landscape by carving into rock and transporting the resulting debris to distant locations.
Glaciers carve the hardest rock formations with great energy and slowly reshape them into debris.
The tremendous energy of slowly moving glaciers transports and finally deposits rock debris into large rock formations.
According to paragraph 5, in what way is the present time unusual in the history of Earth?
There are glaciers.
More land is covered by glaciers than at anytime in the past.
There is no ice age.
No glaciers are found in Australia.

Young children are trusting of commercial advertisements in the media, and advertisers have sometimes been accused of taking advantage of this trusting outlook. The Independent Television Commission, regulator of television advertising in the United Kingdom, has criticized advertisers for "misleadingness"creating a wrong impression either intentionally or unintentionallyin an effort to control advertisers' use of techniques that make it difficult for children to judge the true size, action, performance, or construction of a toy.
General concern about misleading tactics that advertisers employ is centered on the use of exaggeration. Consumer protection groups and parents believe that children are largely ill-equipped to recognize such techniques and that often exaggeration is used at the expense of product information. Claims such as "the best" or "better than" can be subjective and misleading; even adults may be unsure as to their meaning. They represent the advertiser's opinions about the qualities of their products or brand and, as a consequence, are difficult to verify. Advertisers sometimes offset or counterbalance an exaggerated claim with a disclaimera qualification or condition on the claim. For example, the claim that breakfast cereal has a health benefit may be accompanied by the disclaimer "when part of a nutritionally balanced breakfast." However, research has shown that children often have difficulty understanding disclaimers: children may interpret the phrase "when part of a nutritionally balanced breakfast" to mean that the cereal is required as a necessary part of a balanced breakfast. The author George Comstock suggested that less than a quarter of children between the ages of six and eight years old understood standard disclaimers used in many toy advertisements and that disclaimers are more readily comprehended when presented in both audio and visual formats. Nevertheless, disclaimers are mainly presented in audio format only.
 
Fantasy is one of the more common techniques in advertising that could possibly mislead a young audience.  Child-oriented advertisements are more likely to include magic
and fantasy than advertisements aimed at adults.  In a content analysis of Canadian television, the author Stephen Kline observed that nearly all 
commercials for character toys featured fantasy play.  Children have strong imaginations and the use of fantasy brings their ideas to life, but children may not be 
adept enough to realize that what they are viewing is unreal. Fantasy situations and settings are frequently used to attract children's attention, particularly in food advertising. Advertisements for breakfast cereals have, for many years, been found to be especially fond of fantasy techniques, with almost nine out of ten including such content. Generally, 
there is uncertainty as to whether very young children can distinguish between fantasy and reality in advertising. Certainly, rational appeals in advertising aimed at children are limited, as most advertisements use emotional and indirect appeals to psychological states or associations.                                
The use of celebrities such as singers and movie stars is common in advertising. The intention is for the positively perceived attributes of the celebrity to be transferred to the advertised product and for the two to become automatically linked in the audience's mind. In children's advertising, the "celebrities" are often animated figures from popular cartoons. In the recent past, the role of celebrities in advertising to children has often been conflated with the concept of host selling. Host selling involves blending advertisements with regular programming in a way that makes it difficult to distinguish one from the other. Host selling occurs, for example, when a children's show about a cartoon lion contains an ad in which the same lion promotes a breakfast cereal. The psychologist Dale Kunkel showed that the practice of host selling reduced children's ability to distinguish between advertising and program material. It was also found that older children responded more positively to products in host selling advertisements.
Regarding the appearance of celebrities in advertisements that do not involve host selling, the evidence is mixed. Researcher Charles Atkin found that children believe that the characters used to advertise breakfast cereals are knowledgeable about cereals, and children accept such characters as credible sources of nutritional information. This finding was even more marked for heavy viewers of television. In addition, children feel validated in their choice of a product when a celebrity endorses that product. A study of children in Hong Kong, however, found that the presence of celebrities in advertisements could negatively affect the children's perceptions of a product if the children did not like the celebrity in question.
 
Which of the following is NOT mentioned in paragraph 1 as being a difficult judgment for children to make about advertised toys?
How big the toys are
How much the toys cost
What the toys can do
How the toys are made
The word verify in the passage is closest in meaning to
establish the truth of
approve of
understand
criticize
In paragraph 2, what is one reason that claims such as the best or better than can be misleading?
They represent the opinions of adults, which are often different from those of children.
They generally involve comparisons among only a small group of products.
They reflect the attitudes of consumer protection groups rather than those of actual consumers.
They reflect the advertisers viewpoint about the product.
Cereal advertisements that include the statement when part of a nutritionally balanced breakfast are trying to suggest that
the cereal is a desirable part of a healthful, balanced breakfast
the cereal contains equal amounts of all nutrients
cereal is a healthier breakfast than other foods are
the cereal is the most nutritious part of the breakfast meal
According to paragraph 2, all of the following are true of disclaimers made in advertisements EXCEPT:
They are qualifications or conditions put on a claim.
They may be used to balance exaggerations
They are usually presented in both audio and visual formats.
They are often difficult for children to understand.
The word adept in the passage is closest in meaning to
responsible
skillful
patient
curious
Paragraph 3 indicates that there is uncertainty about which of the following issues involving children and fantasy in advertising?
Whether children can tell if what they are seeing in an advertisement is real or fantasy
Whether children can differentiate fantasy techniques from other techniques used in advertising
Whether children realize how commonly fantasy techniques are used in advertising aimed at them
Whether children are attracted to advertisements that lack fantasy
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Rational appeals in advertising are certainly limited by children's emotional immaturity and the indirect nature of their associations.
Indirect appeals to children's psychological states or associations can limit the effectiveness of rational appeals in advertising.
Rational appeals play a much smaller role in advertisements for children than emotional appeals and psychological associations do.
Rational appeals in advertising aimed at children should certainly be limited until the children are emotionally and psychologically ready.
The word "attributes" in the passage is closest in meaning to
evaluations
attitudes
actions
characteristics
In paragraph 4, why does the author mention a show about a cartoon lion in which an advertisement appears featuring the same lion character?
To help explain what is meant by the term "host selling and why it can be misleading to children
To explain why the role of celebrities in advertising aimed at children has often been confused with host selling
To compare the effectiveness of using animated figures with the effectiveness of using celebrities in advertisements aimed at children
To indicate how Kunkel first became interested in studying the effects of host selling on children
The word "credible in the passage is closest in meaning to
helpful
believable
valuable
familiar
According to paragraph 5, what did a study of children in Hong Kong show about the use of celebrities in advertisements aimed at children?
It is most effective with children who watch a lot of television.
It has little effect if the celebrities are not familiar to most children.
It is more effective in marketing cereals and food products than in marketing other kinds of products.
It can have a negative effect if the celebrities are not popular with children.

Pastoralism is a lifestyle in which economic activity is based primarily on livestock. Archaeological evidence suggests that by 3000 B.C., and perhaps even earlier, there had emerged on the steppes of Inner Eurasia the distinctive types of pastoralism that were to dominate the region's history for several millennia. Here, the horse was already becoming the animal of prestige in many regions, though sheep, goats, and cattle could also play a vital role. It is the use of horses for transportation and warfare that explains why Inner Eurasian pastoralism proved the most mobile and the most militaristic of all major forms of pastoralism. The emergence and spread of pastoralism had a profound impact on the history of Inner Eurasia, and also, indirectly, on the parts of Asia and Europe just outside this area. In particular, pastoralism favors a mobile lifestyle, and this mobility helps to explain the impact of pastoralist societies on this part of the world.
The mobility of pastoralist societies reflects their dependence on animal-based foods. While agriculturalists rely on domesticated plants, pastoralists rely on domesticated animals. As a result, pastoralists, like carnivores in general, occupy a higher position on the food chain. All else being equal, this means they must exploit larger areas of land than do agriculturalists to secure the same amount of food, clothing, and other necessities. So pastoralism is a more extensive lifeway than farming is. However, the larger the terrain used to support a group, the harder it is to exploit that terrain while remaining in one place. So, basic ecological principles imply a strong tendency within pastoralist lifeways toward nomadism (a mobile lifestyle). As the archaeologist Roger Cribb puts it, The greater the degree of pastoralism, the stronger the tendency toward nomadism. A modern Turkic nomad interviewed by Cribb commented: "The more animals you have, the farther you have to move."
Nomadism has further consequences. It means that pastoralist societies occupy and can influence very large territories. This is particularly true of the horse pastoralism that emerged in the Inner Eurasian steppes, for this was the most mobile of all major forms of pastoralism. So, it is no accident that with the appearance of pastoralist societies there appear large areas that share similar cultural, ecological, and even linguistic features. By the late fourth millennium B.C., there is already evidence of large culture zones reaching from Eastern Europe to the western borders of Mongolia. Perhaps the most striking sign of mobility is the fact that by the third millennium B.C., most pastoralists in this huge region spoke related languages ancestral to the modern Indo-European languages. The remarkable mobility and range of pastoral societies explain, in part, why so many linguists have argued that the Indo-European languages began their astonishing expansionist career not among farmers in Anatolia (present-day Turkey), but among early pastoralists from Inner Eurasia. Such theories imply that the Indo-European languages evolved not in Neolithic (10,000 to 3,000 B.C.) Anatolia, but among the foraging communities of the cultures in the region of the Don and Dnieper rivers, which took up stock breeding and began to exploit the neighboring steppes.
Nomadism also subjects pastoralist communities to strict rules of portability.  If you are constantly on the move, you cannot afford to accumulate large material surpluses.  Such rules limit variations in accumulated material goods between pastoralist households (though they may also encourage a taste for portable goods of high value such as silks or jewelry).  So, by and large, nomadism implies a high degree of self-sufficiency and inhibits the appearance of an extensive division of labor.  Inequalities of wealth and rank certainly exist, and have probably existed in most pastoralist societies, but except in periods of military conquest, they are normally too slight to generate the stable, hereditary hierarchies that are usually implied by the use of the term class. Inequalities of gender have also existed in pastoralist societies, but they seem to have been softened by the absence of steep hierarchies of wealth in most communities, and also by the requirement that women acquire most of the skills of men, including, often, their military skills.
 
The word prestige in the passage is closest in meaning to
interest
status
demand
profit
According to paragraph 1, what made it possible for Inner Eurasian pastoralism to become the most mobile and militaristic form of pastoralism?
It involved the domestication of several types of animals.
It was based primarily on horses rather than on other animals.
It borrowed and improved upon European ideas for mobility and warfare.
It could be adapted to a wide variety of environments.
The word profound in the passage is closest in meaning to
strange
positive
direct
far-reaching
In paragraph 2, why does the author contrast pastoralists with agriculturalists?
To explain why pastoralism requires more land than agriculturalism to support basic needs
To identify some advantages that mobile societies have over immobile societies
To demonstrate that ecological principles that apply to pastoralism do not apply to agriculturalism
To argue that agriculturalism eventually developed out of pastoralism
According to paragraph 2, pastoralists tend to
prefer grazing their animals on agricultural lands
consume comparatively large amounts of food and clothing
avoid eating plant foods
move from place to place frequently
In paragraph 3, why does the author discuss languages spoken in the region spanning from Eastern Europe to the western borders of Mongolia
To emphasize the frequency with which Indo-European languages changed as a result of the mobile nature of pastoralism
To indicate one method linguists use to determine that inhabitants of the Don and Dnieper river area had taken up stock breeding
To provide evidence that Indo-European languages have their roots in what is now Turkey
To provide evidence that pastoralist societies can exercise cultural influence over a large area
The word "striking in the passage is closest in meaning to
reliable
noticeable
convincing
violent
The word "exploit in the passage is closest in meaning to
use to advantage
depart from
pay attention to
travel across
According to paragraph 4, the fact that pastoralist communities are subject to strict rules of portability encourages such communities to
relocate less frequently than they would otherwise
have households that are more or less equal in wealth
become self-sufficient in the manufacture of silk and jewelry
share large material surpluses with neighboring communities
According to paragraph 4, all of the following are true of social inequality in pastoralist societies EXCEPT:
It exists and has existed to some degree in most pastoral societies.
It is most marked during periods of military conquest.
It is expressed in the form of a rigid hierarchy based largely on heredity.
It is usually too insignificant to be discussed in terms of class differences.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Despite the fact that wealth is relatively evenly distributed in pastoral societies, gender inequality still exists because only men can acquire military skills and social status.
Inequalities of gender existed in pastoralist societies until most communities began to require women to possess the same skills as men and take part in the military.
Inequalities of gender in pastoralist societies were caused by steep hierarchies of wealth and differences in military training between men and women.
In pastoral societies, gender inequality is comparatively mild because wealth is relatively evenly distributed and women have to learn most of the same skills that men do.

Survival and successful reproduction usually require the activities of animals to be coordinated with predictable events around them. Consequently, the timing and rhythms of biological functions must closely match periodic events like the solar day, the tides, the lunar cycle, and the seasons. The relations between animal activity and these periods, particularly for the daily rhythms, have been of such interest and importance that a huge amount of work has been done on them and the special research field of chronobiology has emerged. Normally, the constantly changing levels of an animal's activitysleeping, feeding, moving, reproducing, metabolizing, and producing enzymes and hormones, for exampleare well coordinated with environmental rhythms, but the key question is whether the animal's schedule is driven by external cues, such as sunrise or sunset, or is instead dependent somehow on internal timers that themselves generate the observed biological rhythms. Almost universally, biologists accept the idea that all eukaryotes (a category that includes most organisms except bacteria and certain algae) have internal clocks. By isolating organisms completely from external periodic cues, biologists learned that organisms have internal clocks. For instance, apparently normal daily periods of biological activity were maintained for about a week by the fungus Neurospora when it was intentionally isolated from all geophysical timing cues while orbiting in a space shuttle. The continuation of biological rhythms in an organism without external cues attests to its having an internal clock.
When crayfish are kept continuously in the dark, even for four to five months, their compound eyes continue to adjust on a daily schedule for daytime and nighttime vision. Horseshoe crabs kept in the dark continuously for a year were found to maintain a persistent rhythm of brain activity that similarly adapts their eyes on a daily schedule for bright or for weak light. Like almost all daily cycles of animals deprived of environmental cues, those measured for the horseshoe crabs in these conditions were not exactly 24 hours. Such a rhythm whose period is approximatelybut not exactlya day is called circadian. For different individual horseshoe crabs, the circadian period ranged from 22.2 to 25.5 hours. A particular animal typically maintains its own characteristic cycle duration with great precision for many days. Indeed, stability of the biological clock's period is one of its major features, even when the organism's environment is subjected to considerable changes in factors, such as temperature, that would be expected to affect biological activity strongly. Further evidence for persistent internal rhythms appears when the usual external cycles are shiftedeither experimentally or by rapid east-west travel over great distances. Typically, the animal's daily internally generated cycle of activity continues without change. As a result, its activities are shifted relative to the external cycle of the new environment. The disorienting effects of this mismatch between external time cues and internal schedules may persist, like our jet lag, for several days or weeks until certain cues such as the daylight/darkness cycle reset the organism's clock to synchronize with the daily rhythm of the new environment.
 Animals need natural periodic signals like sunrise to maintain a cycle whose period is precisely 24 hours.  Such an external cue not only 
coordinates an animal's daily rhythms with particular features of the local solar day but alsobecause it normally does so day after day-seems to keep
the internal clock's period close to that of  Earth's rotation.  Yet despite this synchronization of the period of the internal cycle, the animal's timer 
itself continues to have its own genetically built-in period close to, but different from, 24 hours.  Without the external cue, the difference accumulates and so 
the internally regulated activities of the biological day drift continuously, like the tides, in relation to the solar day.  This drift has been studied extensively in 
many animals and in biological activities ranging from the hatching of fruit fly eggs to wheel running by squirrels. Light has a predominating influence in setting the clock.
Even a fifteen-minute burst of light in otherwise sustained darkness can reset an animal's circadian rhythm. Normally, internal rhythms are kept in step by regular environmental cycles.
For instance, if a homing pigeon is to navigate with its Sun compass, its clock must be properly set by cues provided by the daylight/darkness cycle.                             
 
The word Consequently in the passage is closest in meaning to
Therefore
Additionally
Nevertheless
Moreover
In paragraph 1, the experiment on the fungus Neurospora is mentioned to illustrate
the existence of weekly periods of activity as well as daily ones
the finding of evidence that organisms have internal clocks
the effect of space on the internal clocks of organisms
the isolation of one part of an organism's cycle for study
According to paragraph 1, all the following are generally assumed to be true EXCEPT:
It is important for animals' daily activities to be coordinated with recurring events in their environment.
Eukaryotes have internal clocks.
The relationship between biological function and environmental cycles is a topic of intense research.
Animals' daily rhythms are more dependent on external cues than on internal clocks.
The word persistent in the passage is closest in meaning to
adjusted
strong
enduring
predicted
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Stability, a feature of the biological clock's period, depends on changeable factors such as temperature.
A major feature of the biological clock is that its period does not change despite significant changes in the environment.
A factor such as temperature is an important feature in the establishment of the biological clock's period.
Biological activity is not strongly affected by changes in temperature.
According to paragraph 2, which of the following is true about the circadian periods of animals deprived of environmental cues?
They have the same length as the daily activity cycles of animals that are not deprived of such cues.
They can vary significantly from day to day.
They are not the same for all members of a single species.
They become longer over time.
According to paragraph 2, what will an animal experience when its internal rhythms no longer correspond with the daily cycle of the environment?
Disorientation
Change in period of the internal rhythms
Reversal of day and night activities increased
Sensitivity to environmental factors
In paragraph 2, the author provides evidence for the role of biological clocks by
listing the daily activities of an animal's cycle: sleeping, feeding, moving, reproducing, metabolizing, and producing enzymes and hormones
describing the process of establishing the period of a biological clock
presenting cases in which an animal's daily schedule remained stable despite lack of environmental cues
contrasting animals whose daily schedules fluctuate with those of animals whose schedules are constant
The word "duration" in the passage is closest in meaning to
length
feature
process
repetition
In paragraph 2, why does the author mention that the period for different horseshoe crabs ranges from 22.2 to 25.5 hours?
To illustrate that an animal's internal clock seldom has a 24-hour cycle
To argue that different horseshoe crabs will shift from daytime to nighttime vision at different times
To illustrate the approximate range of the circadian rhythm of all animals
To support the idea that external cues are the only factors affecting an animal's periodic behavior
The word it in the passage refers to
an external cue such as sunrise
the daily rhythm of an animal
the local solar day
a cycle whose period is precisely 24 hours
The word sustained in the passage is closest in meaning to
intense
uninterrupted
natural
periodic

It is becoming increasingly common for conservationists to move individual animals or entire species from one site to another. This may be either to establish a new population where a population of conspecifics (animals or plants belonging to the same species) has become extinct or to add individuals to an existing population. The former is termed reintroduction and the latter reinforcement. In both cases, wild individuals are captured in one location and translocated directly to another.
Direct translocation has been used a wide range of plants and animals and was carried out to maintain populations as a source of food long before conservation was a familiar term.  The number of translocations carried out under the banner of conservation has increased rapidly, and this has led to criticism of the technique because of the lack of evaluation of its efficacy and because of its potential disadvantages. The nature of translocation ranges from highly organized and researched national or international programs to ad hoc releases of rescued animals by well- intentioned animal lovers. In a fragmented landscape where many populations and habitats are isolated from others, translocations can play an effective role in conservation strategies; they can increase the number of existing populations or increase the size, genetic diversity, and demographic balance of a small population, consequently increasing its chances of survival.
Translocation clearly has a role in the recovery of species that have substantially declined and is the most likely method by which many sedentary species can recover all or part of their former range. However, against this is the potential for reinforcement translocations to spread disease from one population to another or to introduce deleterious or maladaptive genes to a population. Additionally, translocation of predators or competitors may have negative impacts on other species, resulting in an overall loss of diversity. Last but not least of these considerations is the effort and resources required in this type of action, which need to be justified by evidence of the likely benefits.
Despite the large number of tranlocations that have taken place, there is surprisingly little evidence of the efficacy of such actions. This is partly because many translocations have not been strictly for conservation; neither have they been official nor legal, let alone scientific in their approach. Successful translocations inevitably get recorded and gain attention, whereas failures may never be recorded at all. This makes appraisal of the method very difficult. One key problem is a definition of success. Is translocation successful if the individuals survive the first week or a year, or do they need to reproduce for one or several generations? Whatever the answer, it is clear that a general framework is required to ensure that any translocation is justified, has a realistic chance of success, and will be properly monitored and evaluated for the benefit of future efforts.
An example of apparent translocation success involves the threatened Seychelles warbler. This species was once confined to Cousin Island, one of the Seychelles islands, and reduced to 26 individuals. Careful habitat management increased this number to over 300 birds, but the single population remained vulnerable to local catastrophic events.  The decision was taken to translocate individuals to two nearby islands to reduce this risk.  The translocations took place in 1988 and 1990, and both have resulted in healthy breeding populations.  A successful translocation exercise also appears to have been achieved with red howler monkeys in French Guiana.   A howler population was translocated from a site due to be flooded for hydroelectric power generation. The release site was an area where local hunting had reduced the density of the resident howler population. Released troops of monkeys were kept under visual observation and followed by radio tracking of 16 females. Although the troops appeared to undergo initial problems, causing them to split up, all the tracked females settled into normal behavioral patterns.
Unfortunately, the success stories are at least matched by accounts of failure. Reviewing translocation of amphibians and reptiles, researchers C.Kenneth Dodd and Richard A. Siegel concluded that most projects have not demonstrated success as conservation techniques and should not be advocated as though they were acceptable management and mitigation practices.
 
According to paragraph 1, what distinguishes reinforcement from reintroduction of animal species?
Only reinforcement involves capturing wild individuals.
Only reinforcement involves adding individuals to an existing population.
Only reinforcement requires the use of conspecifics.
Only reinforcement can help once a population is extinct.
The word "efficacy" in the passage is closest in meaning to
effectiveness
advantage
motivation
necessity
Paragraph 2 indicates all of the following about species translocation EXCEPT:
It was used to secure food sources before it was used for conservation purposes.
Its disadvantages have led to a decline in its use for conservation purposes.
It has been used successfully on a wide range of plants and animals.
The way in which it is carried out varies greatly.
The word "substantially" in the passage is closest in meaning to
temporarily
considerably
naturally
suddenly
Paragraph 3 answers all of the following questions about species translocation EXCEPT:
In what type of situation can species translocation be an effective strategy for species conservation?
What are the potential advantages of species translocation as conservation strategy?
What are the potential problems that species translocation can cause?
How can the negative impact of the translocation of predators or competitors on other species be prevented?
The word "appraisal" in the passage is closest in meaning to
acceptance
improvement
evaluation
application
The word "properly" in the passage is closest in meaning to
appropriately
externally
frequently
easily
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 4 about translocation efforts?
Scientific approaches to translocation efforts have increased rapidly.
The current records of success and failure of translocation efforts are not reliable.
Illegal translocations have sometimes been more successful than the legal ones.
The importance of translocation efforts is becoming increasingly apparent as more of these efforts are documented.
According to paragraph 5, why did conservationists decide to translocate the Seychelles warbler from Cousin Island to two other islands?
They were unsuccessful in increasing the population of warblers on Cousin Island.
They warbles were originally native to all three islands.
They wanted to ensure that the warbler species would survive a disaster on Cousin Island.
They expected that human activity on Cousin Island would threaten the warblers.
According to paragraph 5, why were the howler monkeys in French Guiana translocated?
Local hunting had dramatically reduced their population density.
Predators had significantly reduced the number of individuals.
The females of the species had lost their normal behavioral patterns.
Their original site was going to be significantly modified.
In paragraph 6, the author mentions Dodd and Siegel's review of the translocation of amphibians and reptiles in order to
help explain the strategies researches use to review translocation efforts.
support the claim that the successes of translocation as a conservation technique have been matched by its failures.
explain why the translocation of reptiles and amphibians is more difficult than that of other animals.
emphasize that translocation techniques have been tried in a limited number of situations.

Classification schemes are used by biologists to place the huge number of organisms on Earth into natural groupings. Ideally, these groupings are made by taxonomists on the basis of shared distinguishing features. Today taxonomists use such features as anatomy, developmental stages, and biochemical similarities to categorize organisms. Early classification schemes placed all organisms into either the plant or animal kingdom. Later, close examination of the unique structure of fungi and the diversity of single-celled organisms made it necessary to propose additional kingdoms that recognized the fundamental differences among plants, animals, fungi, and unicellular prokaryotes (organisms whose cells do not have a distinct membrane- bound nucleus) and eukaryotes (organisms whose cells have a distinct membrane- bound nucleus). The current scheme consisting of five kingdoms Monera, Protista, Animalia, Fungi, and Plantaewas devised in response to this need.
Scientists do not know how many species share our world. Each year 7000 to 10,000 new species are named. The total number of named species is currently around 1.4 million. However, many scientists believe that 7 million to 10 million species may exist, and estimates range as high as 30 million. Of all of the species that have been identified, about 5 percent are in the Monera and Protista kingdoms. An additional 22 percent are plants and fungi, and the rest are animals. This distribution has little to do with the actual abundance of these organisms and a lot to do with the size of the organisms, how easy they are to classify, and the number of scientists studying them.
The kingdom Protista, defined as comprising all single-celled eukaryotic organisms, is not a natural grouping, and scientists disagree about which organisms it should include. Plants, animals, and fungi all have close protistan relatives, and the separation of single-celled organisms from multicellular organisms is sometimes problematic. It is especially so for the algae, which have both single-celled and multicellular representatives within most smaller taxonomic groupings. Can closely related organisms be placed into separate kingdoms, Protista and Plantae, simply on the basis of multicellularity? If you look at different textbooks, you will see that the algae, photosynthetic organisms with simple reproductionare sometimes placed entirely into Protista, and sometimes they are split between Protista and Plantae depending on whether they are single celled or multicellular. Some taxonomists split the multicellular algae into two kingdoms, placing the multicellular brown and red algae with the protists and the multicellular green algae into the plant kingdom. These different attempts to classify closely related organisms are good examples of how difficult it is to develop standard criteria for grouping organisms, even at the kingdom level.
One approach to this problem, enthusiastically endorsed by Lynn Margulis, a biologist at the University of Massachusetts, is the creation of the kingdom Protoctista. This taxonomic category would include single-celled organisms and their close descendants (for example, the multicellular algae but not the animals, fungi, and plants). Margulis describes the kingdom Protoctista as the entire motley and unruly group of nonplant, nonanimal, nonfungal organisms representative of lineages of the earliest descendants of the eukaryotes.
It is conceptually difficult to group one of the largest multicellular organisms in the world, the brown algae called giant kelps, with simple microscopic single-celled organisms.  Kelps, some of which are up to 60 meters long, possess a tissuelike level of organization that is relatively complex and can transport materials over long distances, as can the tissues of higher plants.  The cells in kelps and some other algae are specialized and show division of labor.  However, kelps reproduce like other algae and differently from plants.  Thomas Cavalier-Smith of the University of British Columbia has proposed that brown algae merit their own kingdom (kingdom Chromista) based on ultrastructural features and molecular comparisons of all algae. So, even among the algae, there are clear differences that some scientists believe are sufficient to justify the status of a separate kingdom.
As we learn more about the relationships between organisms and refine the criteria used to classify them, classification schemes will change. As the superficially simple question In which kingdom should we place the algae? illustrates, the taxonomic categories in textbooks are tentative and subject to revision as we continue to discover more about life on Earth.
 
Paragraph 1 mentions all of the following as features that taxonomists consider when grouping organisms EXCEPT
the size of the organism
the physical structure of the organism
the changes organisms undergo at specific stages
biochemical characteristics that organisms have in common
The discussion of fungi in paragraph 1 suggests that the study of fungi was important for
establishing the earliest classification system
improving our understanding of single-celled organisms
recognizing the inadequacy of the early classification systems
understanding the features that distinguish plants from animals
The word devised in the passage is closest in meaning to
studied
refined
tested
created
According to paragraph 2, which of the following is the LEAST important reason why some kingdoms contain greater numbers of identified species than do other kingdoms?
Some kingdoms contain greater numbers of existing species than do other kingdoms.
Organisms that are large in size are easier to identify than are smaller organisms.
Some organisms are easier to classify than are other organisms.
Some species have been studied by greater numbers of scientists than have other species.
According to paragraph 3, multicellular algae that are closely related to each other are sometimes classified into two separate kingdoms in accordance with their
size
color
number of cells
similarity to animal or plant protists
According to paragraph 5, what is one reason why kelps should not be classified in the same kingdom as plants?
Kelps have a mode of reproduction that is similar to that of all other algae but differs from that of plants.
Kelps have a level of organization that is more complex than that of plant tissue.
Kelps, unlike plants, do not have the capacity to move materials from one part of their tissue to another.
Kelps, unlike plants, do not have cells that are specialized to perform particular biological functions.
How do paragraphs 4 and 5 relate to each other?
The two paragraphs describe the work of two independent researchers who each arrived at the same conclusion
Paragraph 4 describes a taxonomic problem, and paragraph 5 outlines a solution to that problem.
Paragraph 4 proposes criteria for a new taxonomic category, and paragraph 5 provides support for the proposed category.
Paragraph 4 describes an approach to a problem, and paragraph 5 points out the shortcomings of that approach and outlines an alternative.
The word tentative in the passage is closest in meaning to
outdated
uncertain
misunderstood
undefined

In the study of perceptual abilities of infants, a number of techniques are used to determine infants' responses to various stimuli. Because they cannot verbalize or fill out questionnaires, indirect techniques of naturalistic observation are used as the primary means of determining what infants can see, hear, feel, and so forth. Each of these methods compares an infant's state prior to the introduction of a stimulus with its state during or immediately following the stimulus. The difference between the two measures provides the researcher with an indication of the level and duration of the response to the stimulus. For example, if a uniformly moving pattern of some sort is passed across the visual field of a neonate (newborn), repetitive following movements of the eye occur. The occurrence of these eye movements provides evidence that the moving pattern is perceived at some level by the newborn. Similarly, changes in the infant's general level of motor activity turning the head, blinking the eyes, crying, and so forth  have been used by researchers as visual indicators of the infant's perceptual abilities.
Such techniques, however, have limitations. First, the observation may be unreliable in that two or more observers may not agree that the particular response occurred, or to what degree it occurred. Second, responses are difficult to quantify. Often the rapid and diffuse movements of the infant make it difficult to get an accurate record of the number of responses. The third, and most potent, limitation is that it is not possible to be certain that the infant's response was due to the stimulus presented or to a change from no stimulus to a stimulus. The infant may be responding to aspects of the stimulus different than those identified by the investigator. Therefore, when observational assessment is used as a technique for studying infant perceptual abilities, care must be taken not to overgeneralize from the data or to rely on one or two studies as conclusive evidence of a particular perceptual ability of the infant.
Observational assessment techniques have become much more sophisticated, reducing the limitations just presented. Film analysis of the infant's responses, heart and respiration rate monitors, and nonnutritive sucking devices are used as effective tools in understanding infant perception.  Film analysis permits researchers to carefully study the infant's responses over and over and in slow motion.  Precise measurements can be made of the length and frequency of the infant's attention between two stimuli.  Heart and respiration monitors provide the investigator with the number of heartbeats or breaths taken when a new stimulus is presented.  Numerical increases are used as quantifiable indicators of heightened interest in the new stimulus. Increases in nonnutritive sucking were first used as an assessment measure by researchers in 1969. They devised an apparatus that connected a baby's pacifier to a counting device. As stimuli were presented, changes in the infant's sucking behavior were recorded. Increases in the number of sucks were used as an indicator of the infant's attention to or preference for a given visual display.
Two additional techniques of studying infant perception have come into vogue. The first is the habituation-dishabituation technique, in which a single stimulus is presented repeatedly to the infant until there is a measurable decline (habituation) in whatever attending behavior is being observed. At that point a new stimulus is presented, and any recovery (dishabituation) in responsiveness is recorded. If the infant fails to dishabituate and continues to show habituation with the new stimulus, it is assumed that the baby is unable to perceive the new stimulus as different. The habituation-dishabituation paradigm has been used most extensively with studies of auditory and olfactory perception in infants. The second technique relies on evoked potentials, which are electrical brain responses that may be related to a particular stimulus because of where they originate. Changes in the electrical pattern of the brain indicate that the stimulus is getting through to the infant's central nervous system and eliciting some form of response.
Each of the preceding techniques provides the researcher with evidence that the infant can detect or discriminate between stimuli. With these sophisticated observational assessment and electro-physiological measures, we know that the neonate of only a few days is far more perceptive than previously suspected. However, these measures are only "indirect" indicators of the infant's perceptual abilities.
 
Paragraph 1 indicates that researchers use indirect methods primarily to observe the
range of motor activity in neonates
frequency and duration of various stimuli
change in an infant's state following the introduction of a stimulus
range of an infant's visual field
The word "uniformly" in the passage is closest in meaning to
clearly
quickly
consistently
occasionally
Why does the author mention repetitive following movements of the eye?
To identify a response that indicates a neonate's perception of a stimulus
To explain why a neonate is capable of responding to stimuli only through repetitive movements
To argue that motor activity in a neonate may be random and unrelated to stimuli
To emphasize that responses to stimuli vary in infants according to age
Which of the following is NOT mentioned in paragraph 2 as a problem in using the technique of direct observation?
It is impossible to be certain of the actual cause of an infant's response.
Infants' responses, which occur quickly and diffusely, are often difficult to measure.
Infants do not respond well to stimuli presented in an unnatural laboratory setting.
It may be difficult for observers to agree on the presence or the degree of a response.
The word potent in the passage is closest in meaning to
artificial
powerful
common
similar
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Researchers using observational assessment techniques on infants must not overgeneralize and must base their conclusions on data from many studies.
On the basis of the data from one or two studies, it seems that some infants develop a particular perceptual ability not observed in others.
To use data from one or two studies on infant's perceptual abilities, it is necessary to use techniques that will provide conclusive evidence.
When researchers fail to make generalizations from their studies, their observed data is often inconclusive.
What is the authors primary purpose in paragraph 3?
To explain why researchers must conduct more than one type of study when they are attempting to understand infant perception
To describe new techniques for observing infant perception that overcome problems identified in the previous paragraph
To present and evaluate the conclusions of various studies on infant perception
To point out the strengths and weaknesses of three new methods for quantifying an infant's reaction to stimuli
The word quantifiable in the passage is closest in meaning to
visual
permanent
meaningful
measurable
Paragraph 3 mentions all of the following as indications of an infant's heightened interest in a new stimulus EXCEPT an increase in
sucking behavior
heart rate
the number of breaths taken
eye movements
According to paragraph 4, which of the following leads to the conclusion that infants are able to differentiate between stimuli in a habituation-dishabituation study?
Dishabituation occurs with the introduction of a new stimulus.
Electrical responses in the infant's brain decline with each new stimulus.
Habituation is continued with the introduction of a new stimulus.
The infant displays little change in electrical brain responses.
In paragraph 4, what does the author suggest about the way an infant's brain perceives stimuli?
An infant's potential to respond to a stimulus may be related to the size of its brain.
Changes in the electrical patterns of an infant's brain are difficult to detect.
Different areas of an infant's brain respond to different types of stimuli.
An infant is unable to perceive more than one stimulus at a time.
Paragraph 5 indicates that researchers who used the techniques described in the passage discovered that
infants find it difficult to perceive some types of stimuli
neonates of only a few days cannot yet discriminate between stimuli
observational assessment is less useful for studying infant perception than researchers previously believed
a neonate is able to perceive stimuli better than researchers once thought

We all know that many more people today are right-handed than left-handed. Can one trace this same pattern far back in prehistory?  Much of the evidence about right-hand versus left-hand dominance comes from stencils and prints found in rock shelters in Australia and elsewhere, and in many Ice Age caves in France, Spain, and Tasmania.  When a left hand has been stenciled, this implies that the artist was right-handed, and vice versa.  Even though the paint was often sprayed on by mouth, one can assume that the dominant hand assisted in the operation. One also has to make the assumption that hands were stenciled palm downwarda left hand stenciled palm upward might of course look as if it were a right hand.  Of 158 stencils in the French cave of Gargas, 136 have been identified as left, and only 22 as right; right-handedness was therefore heavily predominant.
Cave art furnishes other types of evidence of this phenomenon. Most engravings, for example, are best lit from the left, as befits the work of right-handed artists, who generally prefer to have the light source on the left so that the shadow of their hand does not fall on the tip of the engraving tool or brush. In the few cases where an Ice Age figure is depicted holding something, it is mostly, though not always, in the right hand.
Clues to right-handedness can also be found by other methods. Right-handers tend to have longer, stronger, and more muscular bones on the right side, and Marcellin Boule as long ago as 1911 noted the La Chapelle-aux-Saints Neanderthal skeleton had a right upper arm bone that was noticeably stronger than the left. Similar observations have been made on other Neanderthal skeletons such as La Ferrassie I and Neanderthal itself.
Fractures and other cut marks are another source of evidence. Right-handed soldiers tend to be wounded on the left. The skeleton of a 40- or 50-year-old Nabatean warrior, buried 2,000 years ago in the Negev Desert, Israel, had multiple healed fractures to the skull, the left arm, and the ribs.
Tools themselves can be revealing. Long-handed Neolithic spoons of yew wood preserved in Alpine villages dating to 3000 B.C. have survived; the signs of rubbing on their left side indicate that their users were right-handed. The late Ice Age rope found in the French cave of Lascaux consists of fibers spiraling to the right, and was therefore tressed by a righthander.
Occasionally one can determine whether stone tools were used in the right hand or the left, and it is even possible to assess how far back this feature can be traced. In stone toolmaking experiments, Nick Toth, a right-hander, held the core (the stone that would become the tool) in his left hand and the hammer stone in his right. As the tool was made, the core was rotated clockwise, and the flakes, removed in sequence, had a little crescent of cortex (the core's outer surface) on the side. Toth's knapping produced 56 percent flakes with the cortex on the right, and 44 percent left-oriented flakes. A left-handed toolmaker would produce the opposite pattern. Toth has applied these criteria to the similarly made pebble tools from a number of early sites (before 1.5 million years) at Koobi Fora, Kenya, probably made by Homo habilis. At seven sites he found that 57 percent of the flakes were right-oriented, and 43 percent left, a pattern almost identical to that produced today.
About 90 percent of modern humans are right-handed: we are the only mammal with a preferential use of one hand. The part of the brain responsible for fine control and movement is located in the left cerebral hemisphere, and the findings above suggest that the human brain was already asymmetrical in its structure and function not long after 2 million years ago. Among Neanderthalers of 70,00035,000 years ago, Marcellin Boule noted that the La Chapelle-aux-Saints individual had a left hemisphere slightly bigger than the right, and the same was found for brains of specimens from Neanderthal, Gibraltar, and La Quina.
 
The phrase assisted in in the passage is closest in meaning to
initiated
dominated
helped with
set up
It can be inferred from paragraph 1 that even when paint was sprayed by mouth to make a hand stencil
there was no way to tell which hand was stenciled
the stenciled hand was the weaker hand
the stenciled hand was the dominant hand
artists stenciled more images of the dominant hand than they did of the weak
The phrase depicted in the passage is closest in meaning to
identified
revealed
pictured
imagined
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Right-handed artists could more easily have avoided casting shadows on their work, because engravings in prehistoric caves were lit from the left.
The tips of engraving tools and brushes indicate that these instruments were used by right-handed artists whose work was lit from the left.
The best lighting for most engravings suggests that they were made by right-handed people trying to avoid the shadow of their hands interfering with their work.
Right-handed artists try to avoid having the brush they are using interfere with the light source.
All of the following are mentioned in paragraphs 1 and 2 as evidence of right-handedness in art and artists EXCEPT
the ideal source of lighting for most engravings
the fact that a left hand stenciled palm upward might look like a right hand
the prevalence of outlines of left hands
figures in prehistoric art holding objects with the right hand
According to paragraph 3, the La Chapelle-aux-Saints Neanderthal skeleton can be identified as right-handed because
other Neanderthal skeletons found nearby are also right-handed
the right arm bone is stronger than the left
it is similar to skeletons of La Ferrassie I and Neanderthal
the right side of the skeleton shows less evidence of fractures
Which of the following statements about fractures and cut marks can be inferred from paragraph 4?
Fractures and cut marks caused by right-handed soldiers tend to occur on the right side of the injured party's body.
The right arm sustains more injuries because, as the dominant arm, it is used more actively.
In most people, the left side of the body is more vulnerable to injury since it is not defended effectively by the dominant arm.
Fractures and cut marks on fossil humans probably occurred after death.
According to paragraph 5, what characteristic of a Neolithic spoon would imply that the spoon's owner was right-handed?
The direction of the fibers
Its long handle
The yew wood it is carved from
Wear on its left side
In paragraph 5, why does the author mention the Ice Age rope found in the French cave of Lascaux?
As an example of an item on which the marks of wear imply that it was used by a right-handed person
Because tressing is an activity that is easier for a right-handed person than for a left-handed person
Because the cave of Lascaux is the site where researchers have found several prehistoric tools made for right-handed people
As an example of an item whose construction shows that it was right handed made by a right-person
The word criteria in the passage is closest in meaning to
standards
findings
ideas
techniques
What was the purpose of Toth's toolmaking experiment described in paragraph 6?
To shape tools that could be used by either hand
To produce replicas of early tools for display in museums
To imitate the production of pebble tools from early sites
To determine which hand made the early tools
What is the author's primary purpose in paragraph 7?
To illustrate the importance of studying the brain
To demonstrate that human beings are the only mammal to desire fine control of movement
To contrast the functions of the two hemispheres of the brain
To demonstrate that right-hand preference has existed for a long time

The shift from silent to sound film at the end of the 1920s marks, so far, the most important transformation in motion picture history. Despite all the highly visible technological developments in theatrical and home delivery of the moving image that have occurred over the decades since then, no single innovation has come close to being regarded as a similar kind of watershed. In nearly every language, however the words are phrased, the most basic division in cinema history lies between films that are mute and films that speak.
Yet this most fundamental standard of historical periodization conceals a host of paradoxes. Nearly every movie theater, however modest, had a piano or organ to provide musical accompaniment to silent pictures. In many instances, spectators in the era before recorded sound experienced elaborate aural presentations alongside movies' visual images, from the Japanese benshi (narrators) crafting multivoiced dialogue narratives to original musical compositions performed by symphony-size orchestras in Europe and the United States. In Berlin, for the premiere performance outside the Soviet Union of The Battleship Potemkin, film director Sergei Eisenstein worked with Austrian composer Edmund Meisel (1874-1930) on a musical score matching sound to image; the Berlin screenings with live music helped to bring the film its wide international fame.
Beyond that, the triumph of recorded sound has overshadowed the rich diversity of technological and aesthetic experiments with the visual image that were going forward simultaneously in the 1920s. New color processes, larger or differently shaped screen sizes, multiple-screen projections, even television, were among the developments invented or tried out during the period, sometimes with startling success. The high costs of converting to sound and the early limitations of sound technology were among the factors that suppressed innovations or retarded advancement in these other areas. The introduction of new screen formats was put off for a quarter century, and color, though utilized over the next two decades for special productions, also did not become a norm until the 1950s.
Though it may be difficult to imagine from a later perspective, a strain of critical opinion in the 1920s predicted that sound film would be a technical novelty that would soon fade from sight, just as had many previous attempts, dating well back before the First World War, to link images with recorded sound. These critics were making a common assumptionthat the technological inadequacies of earlier efforts (poor synchronization, weak sound amplification, fragile sound recordings) would invariably occur again. To be sure, their evaluation of the technical flaws in 1920s sound experiments was not so far off the mark, yet they neglected to take into account important new forces in the motion picture field that, in a sense, would not take no for an answer.
These forces were the rapidly expanding electronics and telecommunications companies that were developing and linking telephone and wireless technologies in the 1920s. In the United States, they included such firms as American Telephone and Telegraph, General Electric, and Westinghouse. They were interested in all forms of sound technology and all potential revenues for commercial exploitation. Their competition and collaboration were creating the broadcasting industry in the United States, beginning with the introduction of commercial radio programming in the early 1920s.  With financial assets considerably greater than those in the motion picture industry, and perhaps a wider vision of the relationships among entertainment and communications media, they revitalized research into recording sound for motion pictures.
 In 1929 the United States motion picture industry released more than 300 sound filmsa rough figure, since a number were silent films with music tracks, or films prepared in dual versions, to take account of the many cinemas not yet wired for sound.  At the production level, in the United States the conversion was virtually complete by 1930.  In Europe it took a little longer, mainly because there were more small producers for whom the costs of sound were prohibitive, and in other parts of the world problems with rights or access to equipment delayed the shift to sound production for a few more years (though cinemas in major cities may have been wired in order to play foreign sound films). The triumph of sound cinema was swift, complete, and enormously popular.
 
The word regarded in the passage is closest in meaning to
analyzed
considered
altered
criticized
According to paragraph 1, which of the following is the most significant development in the history of film?
The technological innovation of sound film during the 1920s
The development of a technology for translating films into other languages
The invention of a method for delivering movies to people's homes
The technological improvements allowing clearer images in films
The word paradoxes in the passage is closest in meaning to
difficulties
accomplishments
parallels
contradictions
Why does the author mention Japanese benshi and original musical compositions?
To suggest that audiences preferred other forms of entertainment to film before the transition to sound inthe1920's
To provide examples of some of the first sounds that were recorded for film
To indicate some ways in which sound accompanied film before the innovation of sound films in the late 1920s
To show how the use of sound in films changed during different historical periods
Paragraph 2 suggests which of the following about Eisensteins film The Battleship Potemkirf?
The film was not accompanied by sound before its Berlin screening.
The film was unpopular in the Soviet Union before it was screened in Berlin.
Eisensteins film was the first instance of collaboration between a director and a composer.
Eisenstein believed that the musical score in a film was as important as dialogue.
The word overshadowed in the passage is closest in meaning to
distracted from
explained
conducted
coordinated with
According to paragraph 3, which of the following is NOT true of the technological and aesthetic experiments of the 1920's?
Because the costs of introducing recorded sound were low, it was the only innovation that was put to use in the 1920's.
The introduction of recorded sound prevented the development of other technological innovations in the 1920's.
The new technological and aesthetic developments of the 1920s included the use of color, new screen formats, and television.
Many of the innovations developed in the 1920s were not widely introduced until as late as the 1950's.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
It was difficult for some critics in the 1920s to imagine why the idea of sound film had faded from sight well before the First World War.
As surprising as it seems today, some critics in the 1920s believed that the new attempts at sound films would fade just as quickly as the attempts made before the First World War.
Though some early critics thought that sound film would fade, its popularity during the First World War proved that it was not simply a technical novelty.
Although some critics predicted well before the First World War that sound film would be an important technical innovation, it was not attempted until the 1920s.
The word neglected in the passage is closest in meaning to
failed
needed
started
expected
According to paragraph 4, which of the following is true about the technical problems of early sound films?
Linking images with recorded sound was a larger obstacle than weak sound amplification or fragile sound recordings.
Sound films in the 1920s were unable to solve the technical flaws found in sound films before the First World War.
Technical inadequacies occurred less frequently in early sound films than critics suggested.
Critics assumed that it would be impossible to overcome the technical difficulties experienced with earlier sound films.
In paragraph 5, commercial radio programming is best described as the result of
a financially successful development that enabled large telecommunications firms to weaken their competition.
the desire of electronics and telecommunications companies to make sound technology profitable
a major development in the broadcasting industry that occurred before the 1920s
the cooperation between telecommunications companies and the motion picture industry
According to paragraph 6, which of the following accounts for the delay in the conversion to sound films in Europe?
European producers often lacked knowledge about the necessary equipment for the transition to sound films.
Smaller European producers were often unable to afford to add sound to their films.
It was often difficult to wire older cinemas in the major cities to play sound films.
Smaller European producers believed that silent films with music accompaniment were aesthetically superior to sound films.

In order to understand ancient Egyptian art, it is vital to know as much as possible of the elite Egyptians' view of the world and the functions and contexts of the art produced for them. Without this knowledge we can appreciate only the formal content of Egyptian art, and we will fail to understand why it was produced or the concepts that shaped it and caused it to adopt its distinctive forms. In fact, a lack of understanding concerning the purposes of Egyptian art has often led it to be compared unfavorably with the art of other cultures: Why did the Egyptians not develop sculpture in which the body turned and twisted through space like classical Greek statuary? Why do the artists seem to get left and right confused? And why did they not discover the geometric perspective as European artists did in the Renaissance? The answer to such questions has nothing to do with a lack of skill or imagination on the part of Egyptian artists and everything to do with the purposes for which they were producing their art.
The majority of three-dimensional representations, whether standing, seated, or kneeling, exhibit what is called frontality: they face straight ahead, neither twisting nor turning. When such statues are viewed in isolation, out of their original context and without knowledge of their function, it is easy to criticize them for their rigid attitudes that remained unchanged for three thousand years. Frontality is, however, directly related to the functions of Egyptian statuary and the contexts in which the statues were set up. Statues were created not for their decorative effect but to play a primary role in the cults of the gods, the king, and the dead. They were designed to be put in places where these beings could manifest themselves in order to be the recipients of ritual actions. Thus it made sense to show the statue looking ahead at what was happening in front of it, so that the living performer of the ritual could interact with the divine or deceased recipient. Very often such statues were enclosed in rectangular shrines or wall niches whose only opening was at the front, making it natural for the statue to display frontality. Other statues were designed to be placed within an architectural setting, for instance, in front of the monumental entrance gateways to temples known as pylons, or in pillared courts, where they would be placed against or between pillars: their frontality worked perfectly within the architectural context.
Statues were normally made of stone, wood, or metal. Stone statues were worked from single rectangular blocks of material and retained the compactness of the original shape. The stone between the arms and the body and between the legs in standing figures or the legs and the seat in seated ones was not normally cut away. From a practical aspect this protected the figures against breakage and psychologically gives the images a sense of strength and power, usually enhanced by a supporting back pillar. By contrast, wooden statues were carved from several pieces of wood that were pegged together to form the finished work, and metal statues were either made by wrapping sheet metal around a wooden core or cast by the lost wax process. The arms could be held away from the body and carry separate items in their hands; there is no back pillar. The effect is altogether lighter and freer than that achieved in stone, but because both perform the same function, formal wooden and metal statues still display frontality.
Apart from statues representing deities, kings, and named members of the elite that can be called formal, there is another group of three-dimensional representations that depicts generic figures, frequently servants, from the nonelite population.  The function of these is quite different.  Many are made to be put in the tombs of the elite in order to serve the tomb owners in the afterlife.  Unlike formal statues that are limited to static poses of standing, sitting, and kneeling, these figures depict a wide range of actions, such as grinding grain, baking bread, producing pots, and making music, and they are shown in appropriate poses, bending and squatting as they carry out their tasks. 
 
The word vital in the passage is closest in meaning to
attractive
essential
usual
practical
Paragraph 1 suggests that one reason Egyptian art is viewed less favorably than other art is that Egyptian art lacks
a realistic sense of human body proportion
a focus on distinctive forms of varying sizes
the originality of European art
the capacity to show the human body in motion
In paragraph 1, the author mentions all of the following as necessary in appreciating Egyptian art EXCEPT an understanding of
the reasons why the art was made
the nature of aristocratic Egyptian beliefs
the influences of Egyptian art on later art such as classical Greek art
how the art was used
According to paragraph 2, why are Egyptian statues portrayed frontality?
To create a psychological effect of distance and isolation
To allow them to fulfill their important role in ceremonies of Egyptian life
To provide a contrast to statues with a decorative function
To suggest the rigid, unchanging Egyptian philosophical attitudes
The word context in the passage is closest in meaning to
connection
influence
environment
requirement
The author mentions an architectural setting in the passage in order to
suggest that architecture was as important as sculpture to Egyptian artists
offer a further explanation for the frontal pose of Egyptian statues
explain how the display of statues replaced other forms of architectural decoration
illustrate the religious function of Egyptian statues
The word they in the passage refers to
statues
gateways
temples
pillared courts
According to paragraph 3, why were certain areas of a stone statue left uncarved?
To prevent damage by providing physical stability
To emphasize that the material was as important as the figure itself
To emphasize that the figure was not meant to be a real human being
To provide another artist with the chance to finish the carving
The word core in the passage is closest in meaning to
material
layer
center
frame
According to paragraph 3, which of the following statements about wooden statues is true?
Wooden statues were usually larger than stone statues.
Wooden statues were made from a single piece of wood.
Wooden statues contained pieces of metal or stone attached to the front.
Wooden statues had a different effect on the viewer than stone statues.
The word depicts in the passage is closest in meaning to
imagines
classifies
elevates
portrays
According to paragraph 4, what is the difference between statues that represent the Egyptian elite and statues that represent the nonelite classes?
Statues of the elite are included in tombs, but statues of the nonelite are not.
Statues of the elite are in motionless poses, while statues of the nonelite are in active poses.
Statues of the elite are shown standing, while statues of the nonelite are shown sitting or kneeling.
Statues of the elite serve an important function, while statues of the nonelite are decorative.

To South Americans, robins are birds that fly north every spring. To North Americans, the robins simply vacation in the south each winter. Furthermore, they fly to very specific places in South America and will often come back to the same trees in North American yards the following spring. The question is not why they would leave the cold of winter so much as how they find their way around. The question perplexed people for years, until, in the 1950s, a German scientist named Gustave Kramer provided some answers and, in the process, raised new questions.
Kramer initiated important new kinds of research regarding how animals orient and navigate. Orientation is simply facing in the right direction; navigation involves finding ones way from point A to point B.
Early in his research, Kramer found that caged migratory birds became very restless at about the time they would normally have begun migration in the wild. Furthermore, he noticed that as they fluttered around in the cage, they often launched themselves in the direction of their normal migratory route. He then set up experiments with caged starlings and found that their orientation was, in fact, in the proper migratory direction except when the sky was overcast, at which times there was no clear direction to their restless movements. Kramer surmised, therefore, that they were orienting according to the position of the Sun. To test this idea, he blocked their view of the Sun and used mirrors to change its apparent position. He found that under these circumstances, the birds oriented with respect to the new "Sun." They seemed to be using the Sun as a compass to determine direction. At the time, this idea seemed preposterous. How could a bird navigate by the Sun when some of us lose our way with road maps? Obviously, more testing was in order.
So, in another set of experiments, Kramer put identical food boxes around the cage, with food in only one of the boxes.  The boxes were stationary, and the one containing food was always at the same point of the compass.  However, its position with respect to the surroundings could be changed by revolving either the inner cage containing the birds or the outer walls, which served as the background.  As long as the birds could see the Sun, no matter how their surroundings were altered, they went directly to the correct food box.  whether the box appeared in front of the right wall or the left wall, they showed no signs of confusion. On overcast days, however, the birds were disoriented and had trouble locating their food box.
In experimenting with artificial suns, Kramer made another interesting discovery. If the artificial Sun remained stationary, the birds would shift their direction with respect to it at a rate of about 15 degrees per hour, the Sun's rate of movement across the sky. Apparently, the birds were assuming that the "Sun" they saw was moving at that rate. When the real Sun was visible, however, the birds maintained a constant direction as it moved across the sky. In other words, they were able to compensate for the Sun's movement. This meant that some sort of biological clock was operating-and a very precise clock at that.
What about birds that migrate at night? Perhaps they navigate by the night sky. To test the idea, caged night-migrating birds were placed on the floor of a planetarium during their migratory period. A planetarium is essentially a theater with a domelike ceiling onto which a night sky can be projected for any night of the year. When the planetarium sky matched the sky outside, the birds fluttered in the direction of their normal migration. But when the dome was rotated, the birds changed their direction to match the artificial sky. The results clearly indicated that the birds were orienting according to the stars.
There is accumulating evidence indicating that birds navigate by using a wide variety of environmental cues. Other areas under investigation include magnetism, landmarks, coastlines, sonar, and even smells. The studies are complicated by the fact that the data are sometimes contradictory and the mechanisms apparently change from time to time. Furthermore, one sensory ability may back up another.
 
Which of the following can be inferred about bird migration from paragraph 1?
Birds will take the most direct migratory route to their new habitat.
The purpose of migration is to join with larger groups of birds.
Bird migration generally involves moving back and forth between north and south.
The destination of birds' migration can change from year to year.
The word perplexed in the passage is closest in meaning to
defeated
interested
puzzled
occupied
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Experiments revealed that caged starlings displayed a lack of directional sense and restless movements.
Experiments revealed that caged starlings were unable to orient themselves in the direction of their normal migratory route.
Experiments revealed that the restless movement of caged starlings had no clear direction.
Experiments revealed that caged starlings' orientation was accurate unless the weather was overcast.
The word preposterous in the passage is closest in meaning to
unbelievable
inadequate
limited
creative
According to paragraph 3, why did Kramer use mirrors to change the apparent position of the Sun?
To test the effect of light on the birds' restlessness
To test whether birds were using the Sun to navigate
To simulate the shifting of light the birds would encounter along their regular migratory route
To cause the birds to migrate at a different time than they would in the wild
According to paragraph 3, when do caged starlings become restless?
When the weather is overcast
When they are unable to identify their normal migratory route
When their normal time for migration arrives
When mirrors are used to change the apparent position of the Sun
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 4 about Kramer's reason for filling one food box and leaving the rest empty?
He believed the birds would eat food from only one box.
He wanted to see whether the Sun alone controlled the birds' ability to navigate toward the box with food.
He thought that if all the boxes contained food, this would distract the birds from following their migratory route.
He needed to test whether the birds preferred having the food at any particular point of the compass.
According to paragraph 5, how did the birds fly when the real Sun was visible?
They kept the direction of their flight constant.
They changed the direction of their flight at a rate of 15 degrees per hour.
They kept flying toward the Sun.
They flew in the same direction as the birds that were seeing the artificial Sun.
The experiment described in paragraph 5 caused Kramer to conclude that birds possess a biological clock because
when birds navigate they are able to compensate for the changing position of the Sun in the sky
birds innate bearings keep them oriented in a direction that is within 15 degrees of the Sun's direction
birds' migration is triggered by natural environmental cues, such as the position of the Sun
birds shift their direction at a rate of 15 degrees per hour whether the Sun is visible or not
According to paragraph 6, how did the birds navigate in the planetarium's nighttime environment?
By waiting for the dome to stop rotating
By their position on the planetarium floor
By orienting themselves to the stars in the artificial night sky
By navigating randomly until they found the correct orientation
Which of the following best describes the author's presentation of information in the passage?
A number of experiments are described to support the idea that birds use the Sun and the night sky to navigate.
The author uses logic to show that the biological clock in birds is inaccurate.
A structured argument about the importance of internal versus external cues for navigation is presented.
The opposing points of view about bird migration are clarified through the study of contrasting experiments.
The word accumulating in the passage is closest in meaning to
new
increasing
convincing
extensive

Many signals that animals make seem to impose on the signalers costs that are overly damaging.  A classic example is noisy begging by nestling songbirds when a parent returns to the nest with food.  These loud cheeps and peeps might give the location of the nest away to a listening hawk or raccoon, resulting in the death of the defenseless nestlings.  In fact, when tapes of begging tree swallows were played at an artificial swallow nest containing an egg, the egg in that noisy nest was taken or destroyed by predators before the egg in a nearby quiet nest in 29 of 37 trials. 
Further evidence for the costs of begging comes from a study of differences in the begging calls of warbler species that nest on the ground versus those that nest in the relative safety of trees. The young of ground-nesting warblers produce begging cheeps of higher frequencies than do their tree-nesting relatives. These higher-frequency sounds do not travel as far, and so may better conceal the individuals producing them, who are especially vulnerable to predators in their ground nests. David Haskell created artificial nests with clay eggs and placed them on the ground beside a tape recorder that played the begging calls of either tree-nesting or of ground-nesting warblers. The eggs advertised by the tree-nesters' begging calls were found bitten significantly more often than the eggs associated with the ground-nesters' calls.
The hypothesis that begging calls have evolved properties that reduce their potential for attracting predators yields a prediction: baby birds of species that experience high rates of nest predation should produce softer begging signals of higher frequency than nestlings of other species less often victimized by nest predators. This prediction was supported by data collected in one survey of 24 species from an Arizona forest, more evidence that predator pressure favors the evolution of begging calls that are hard to detect and pinpoint.
Given that predators can make it costly to beg for food, what benefit do begging nestlings derive from their communications? One possibility is that a noisy baby bird provides accurate signals of its real hunger and good health, making it worthwhile for the listening parent to give it food in a nest where several other offspring are usually available to be fed. If this hypothesis is true, then it follows that nestlings should adjust the intensity of their signals in relation to the signals produced by their nestmates, who are competing for parental attention. When experimentally deprived baby robins are placed in a nest with normally fed siblings, the hungry nestlings beg more loudly than usualbut so do their better-fed siblings, though not as loudly as the hungrier birds.
If parent birds use begging intensity to direct food to healthy offspring capable of vigorous begging, then parents should make food delivery decisions on the basis of their offsprings calls. Indeed, if you take baby tree swallows out of a nest for an hour feeding half the set and starving the other half, when the birds are replaced in the nest, the starved youngsters beg more loudly than the fed birds, and the parent birds feed the active beggars more than those who beg less vigorously.
As these experiments show, begging apparently provides a signal of need that parents use to make judgments about which offspring can benefit most from a feeding. But the question arises, why don't nestlings beg loudly when they aren't all that hungry? By doing so, they could possibly secure more food, which should result in more rapid growth or larger size, either of which is advantageous. The answer lies apparently not in the increased energy costs of exaggerated beggingsuch energy costs are small relative to the potential gain in caloriesbut rather in the damage that any successful cheater would do to its siblings, which share genes with one another. An individual's success in propagating his or her genes can be affected by more than just his or her own personal reproductive success. Because close relatives have many of the same genes, animals that harm their close relatives may in effect be destroying some of their own genes. Therefore, a begging nestling that secures food at the expense of its siblings might actually leave behind fewer copies of its genes overall than it might otherwise.
 
The phrase impose on in the passage is closest in meaning to
increase for
remove from
place on
distribute to
According to paragraph 1, the experiment with tapes of begging tree swallows establishes which of the following?
Begging by nestling birds can attract the attention of predators to the nest.
Nest predators attack nests that contain nestlings more frequently than they attack nests that contain only eggs.
Tapes of begging nestlings attract predators to the nest less frequently than real begging calls do.
Nest predators have no other means of locating bird nests except the begging calls of nestling birds.
The word artificial in the passage is closest in meaning to
attractive
not real
short-term
well designed
Paragraph 2 indicates that the begging calls of tree nesting warblers
put them at more risk than ground-nesting warblers experience
can be heard from a greater distance than those of ground-nesting warblers
are more likely to conceal the signaler than those of ground-nesting warblers
have higher frequencies than those of ground-nesting warblers
The experiment described in paragraph 2 supports which of the following conclusions?
Predators are unable to distinguish between the begging cheeps of ground-nesting and those of tree-nesting warblers except by the differing frequencies of the calls.
When they can find them, predators prefer the eggs of tree-nesting warblers to those of ground-nesting warblers.
The higher frequencies of the begging cheeps of ground-nesting warblers are an adaptation to the threat that ground-nesting birds face from predators.
The danger of begging depends more on the frequency of the begging cheep than on how loud it is.
The word prediction in the passage is closest in meaning to
surprise
discovery
explanation
expectation
The word pinpoint in the passage is closest in meaning to
observe
locate exactly
copy accurately
recognize
The word derive in the passage is closest in meaning to
require
gain
use
produce
In paragraphs 4 and 5, what evidence supports the claim that the intensity of nestling begging calls is a good indicator of which offspring in a nest would most benefit from a feeding?
When placed in a nest with hungry robins, well-fed robins did not beg for food.
Among robin nestlings, the intensity of begging decreased the more the nestlings were fed.
Hungry tree swallow nestlings begged louder than well-fed nestlings in the same nest.
Hungry tree swallow nestlings continued to beg loudly until they were fed whereas well-fed nestlings soon stopped begging.
It can be inferred from paragraphs 4 and 5 that parent songbirds normally do not feed
nestlings that are too weak to beg for food as vigorously as their nestmates
more than one hungry nestling during a single visit to the nest
offspring that were fed by the parents on the previous visit to the nest
nestlings that have been removed and then later put back into their nest
In paragraph 6, the author compares the energy costs of vigorous begging with the potential gain in calories from such begging in order to
explain why begging for food vigorously can lead to faster growth and increased size
explain how begging vigorously can increase an individuals chance of propagating its own genes
point out a weakness in a possible explanation for why nestlings do not always beg vigorously
argue that the benefits of vigorous begging outweigh any possible disadvantages
According to paragraph 6, which of the following explains the fact that a well-fed nestling does not beg loudly for more food?
There is no benefit for a nestling to get more food than it needs to survive.
By begging loudly for food it does not need, a nestling would unnecessarily expose itself to danger from predators.
If a nestling begs loudly when it is not truly hungry, then when it is truly hungry its own begging may be drowned out by that of its well-fed siblings.
More of a nestling's genes will be passed to the next generation if its hungry siblings get enough food to survive.

China has one of the world's oldest continuous civilizationsdespite invasions and occasional foreign rule. A country as vast as China with so long-lasting a civilization has a complex social and visual history, within which pottery and porcelain play a major role.
The function and status of ceramics in China varied from dynasty to dynasty, so they may be utilitarian, burial, trade-collectors', or even ritual objects, according to their quality and the era in which they were made. The ceramics fall into three broad typesearthenware, stoneware, and porcelainfor vessels, architectural items such as roof tiles, and modeled objects and figures. In addition, there was an important group of sculptures made for religious use, the majority of which were produced in earthenware.
The earliest ceramics were fired to earthenware temperatures, but as early as the fifteenth century B.C., high-temperature stonewares were being made with glazed surfaces. During the Six Dynasties period (AD 265-589), kilns in north China were producing high-fired ceramics of good quality. Whitewares produced in Hebei and Henan provinces from the seventh to the tenth centuries evolved into the highly prized porcelains of the Song dynasty (AD. 960-1279), long regarded as one of the high points in the history of China's ceramic industry. The tradition of religious sculpture extends over most historical periods but is less clearly delineated than that of stonewares or porcelains, for it embraces the old custom of earthenware burial ceramics with later religious images and architectural ornament. Ceramic products also include lead-glazed tomb models of the Han dynasty, three-color lead-glazed vessels and figures of the Tang dynasty, and Ming three-color temple ornaments, in which the motifs were outlined in a raised trail of slipas well as the many burial ceramics produced in imitation of vessels made in materials of higher intrinsic value.
Trade between the West and the settled and prosperous Chinese dynasties introduced new forms and different technologies. One of the most far-reaching examples is the impact of the fine ninth-century AD. Chinese porcelain wares imported into the Arab world.   So admired were these pieces that they encouraged the development of earthenware made in imitation of porcelain and instigated research into the method of their manufacture.   From the Middle East the Chinese acquired a blue pigmenta purified form of cobalt oxide unobtainable at that time in Chinathat contained only a low level of manganese. Cobalt ores found in China have a high manganese content, which produces a more muted blue-gray color.   In the seventeenth century, the trading activities of the Dutch East India Company resulted in vast quantities of decorated Chinese porcelain being brought to Europe, which stimulated and influenced the work of a wide variety of wares, notably Delft.  The Chinese themselves adapted many specific vessel forms from the West, such as bottles with long spouts, and designed a range of decorative patterns especially for the European market.
Just as painted designs on Greek pots may seem today to be purely decorative, whereas in fact they were carefully and precisely worked out so that at the time, their meaning was clear, so it is with Chinese pots. To twentieth-century eyes, Chinese pottery may appear merely decorative, yet to the Chinese the form of each object and its adornment had meaning and significance. The dragon represented the emperor, and the phoenix, the empress; the pomegranate indicated fertility, and a pair of fish, happiness; mandarin ducks stood for wedded bliss; the pine tree, peach, and crane are emblems of long life; and fish leaping from waves indicated success in the civil service examinations. Only when European decorative themes were introduced did these meanings become obscured or even lost.
From early times pots were used in both religious and secular contexts. The imperial court commissioned work and in the Yuan dynasty (A.D. 1279-1368) an imperial ceramic factory was established at Jingdezhen. Pots played an important part in some religious ceremonies. Long and often lyrical descriptions of the different types of ware exist that assist in classifying pots, although these sometimes confuse an already large and complicated picture.
 
The word status in the passage is closest in meaning to
origin
importance
quality
design
According to paragraph 2, which of the following is true of Chinese ceramics?
The function of ceramics remained the same from dynasty to dynasty.
The use of ceramics as trade objects is better documented than the use of ceramics as ritual objects.
There was little variation in quality for any type of ceramics over time.
Some religious sculptures were made using the earthenware type of ceramics.
The word evolved in the passage is closest in meaning to
divided
extended
developed
vanished
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
While stonewares and porcelains are found throughout most historical periods, religious sculpture is limited to the ancient period.
Religious sculpture was created in most periods, but its history is less clear than that of stonewares or porcelains because some old forms continued to be used even when new ones were developed.
While stonewares and porcelains changed throughout history, religious sculpture remained uniform in form and use.
The historical development of religious sculpture is relatively unclear because religious sculptures sometimes resemble earthenware architectural ornaments.
Paragraph 3 supports all of the following concerning the history of the ceramic industry in China EXCEPT:
The earliest high-fired ceramics were of poor quality.
Ceramics produced during the Tang and Ming dynasties sometimes incorporated multiple colors.
Earthenware ceramics were produced in China before stonewares were.
The Song dynasty period was notable for the production of high quality porcelain ceramics.
The word instigated in the passage is closest in meaning to
improved
investigated
narrowed
caused
According to paragraph 4, one consequence of the trade of Chinese ceramics was
the transfer of a distinctive blue pigment from China to the Middle East
an immediate change from earthenware production to porcelain production in European countries
Chinese production of wares made for the European market
a decreased number of porcelain vessels available on the European market
The word whereas in the passage is closest in meaning to
while
previously
surprisingly
because
In paragraph 5, the author compares the designs on Chinese pots to those on Greek pots in order to
emphasize that while Chinese pots were decorative, Greek pots were functional
argue that the designs on Chinese pots had specific meanings and were not just decorative
argue that twentieth-century scholars are better able to understand these designs than were ancient scholars
explain how scholars have identified the meaning of specific images on Chinese pots
Which of the following is mentioned in paragraph 5 as being symbolically represented on Chinese ceramics?
Chinese rulers
love of homeland
loyally to friends
success in trade
Paragraph 5 suggests which of the following about the decorations on Chinese pottery?
They had more importance for aristocrats than for ordinary citizens.
Their significance may have remained clear had the Chinese not come under foreign influence.
They contain some of the same images that appear on Greek pots
Their significance is now as clear to twentieth century observers as it was to the early Chinese.
The word these in the passage refers to
religious ceremonies
descriptions
types of ware
pots

One of the most difficult aspects of deciding whether current climatic events reveal evidence of the impact of human activities is that it is hard to get a measure of what constitutes the natural variability of the climate. We know that over the past millennia the climate has undergone major changes without any significant human intervention. We also know that the global climate system is immensely complicated and that everything is in some way connected, and so the system is capable of fluctuating in unexpected ways. We need therefore to know how much the climate can vary of its own accord in order to interpret with confidence the extent to which recent changes are natural as opposed to being the result of human activities.
Instrumental records do not go back far enough to provide us with reliable measurements of global climatic variability on timescales longer than a century. What we do know is that as we include longer time intervals, the record shows increasing evidence of slow swings in climate between different regimes. To build up a better picture of fluctuations appreciably further back in time requires us to use proxy records.
Over long periods of time, substances whose physical and chemical properties change with the ambient climate at the time can be deposited in a systematic way to provide a continuous record of changes in those properties overtime, sometimes for hundreds or thousands of years. Generally, the layering occurs on an annual basis, hence the observed changes in the records can be dated. Information on temperature, rainfall, and other aspects of the climate that can be inferred from the systematic changes in properties is usually referred to as proxy data. Proxy temperature records have been reconstructed from ice core drilled out of the central Greenland ice cap, calcite shells embedded in layered lake sediments in Western Europe, ocean floor sediment cores from the tropical Atlantic Ocean, ice cores from Peruvian glaciers, and ice cores from eastern Antarctica. While these records provide broadly consistent indications that temperature variations can occur on a global scale, there are nonetheless some intriguing differences, which suggest that the pattern of temperature variations in regional climates can also differ significantly from each other.
What the proxy records make abundantly clear is that there have been significant natural changes in the climate over timescales longer than a few thousand years. Equally striking, however, is the relative stability of the climate in the past 10.000 years (the Holocene period).
To the extent that the coverage of the global climate from these records can provide a measure of its true variability, it should at least indicate how all the natural causes of climate change have combined. These include the chaotic fluctuations of the atmosphere, the slower but equally erratic behavior of the oceans, changes in the land surfaces, and the extent of ice and snow. Also included will be any variations that have arisen from volcanic activity, solar activity, and, possibly, human activities.
One way to estimate how all the various processes leading to climate variability will combine is by using computer models of the global climate. They can do only so much to represent the full complexity of the global climate and hence may give only limited information about natural variability. Studies suggest that to date the variability in computer simulations is considerably smaller than in data obtained from the proxy records.
In addition to the internal variability of the global climate system itself, there is the added factor of external influences, such as volcanoes and solar activity.  There is a growing body of opinion that both these physical variations have a measurable impact on the climate.  Thus we need to be able to include these in our deliberations.  Some current analyses conclude that volcanoes and solar activity explain quite a considerable amount of the observed variability in the period from the seventeenth to the early twentieth centuries, but that they cannot be invoked to explain the rapid warming in recent decades. 
 
According to paragraph 1, which of the following must we find out in order to determine the impact of human activities upon climate?
The major changes in climate over the past millennia
The degree to which the climate varies naturally
The best method for measuring climatic change
The millennium when humans began to interfere with the climate
According to paragraph 2, an advantage of proxy records over instrumental records is that
they are more-reliable measures of climatic variability in the past century
they provide more-accurate measures of local temperatures
they provide information on climate fluctuations further back in time
they reveal information about the human impact on the climate
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Because physical and chemical properties of substances are unchanging, they are useful records of climate fluctuations over time.
For hundreds or thousands of years, people have been observing changes in the chemical and physical properties of substances in order to infer climate change.
Because it takes long periods of time for the climate to change, systematic changes in the properties of substances are difficult to observe.
Changes in systematically deposited substances that are affected by climate can indicate climate variations over time.
According to paragraph 3, scientists are able to reconstruct proxy temperature records by
studying regional differences in temperature variations
studying and dating changes in the properties of substances
observing changes in present day climate conditions
inferring past climate shifts from observations of current climatic changes
The word striking in the passage is closest in meaning to
noticeable
confusing
true
unlikely
According to paragraphs 3 and 4, proxy data have suggested all of the following about the climate EXCEPT:
Regional climates may change overtime.
The climate has changed very little in the past 10,000 years.
Global temperatures vary more than regional temperatures.
Important natural changes in climate have occurred over large timescales.
The word erratic in the passage is closest in meaning to
dramatic
important
unpredictable
common
All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 5 as natural causes of climate change EXCEPT
atmospheric changes
the slow movement of landmasses
fluctuations in the amount of ice and snow
changes in ocean activity
According to paragraph 6, which of the following is true of computer models of the global climate?
The information they produce is still limited.
They are currently most useful in understanding past climatic behaviors.
They allow researchers to interpret the data obtained from proxy records.
They do not provide information about regional climates.
The word deliberations in the passage is closest in meaning to
records
discussions
results
variations
The word invoked in the passage is closest in meaning to
demonstrated
called upon
supported
expected
What is the author's purpose in presenting the information in paragraph 7?
To compare the influence of volcanoes and solar activity on climate variability with the influence of factors external to the global climate system
To indicate that there are other types of influences on climate variability in addition to those previously discussed
To explain how external influences on climate variability differ from internal influences
To argue that the rapid warming of Earth in recent decades cannot be explained

In the late sixteenth century and into the seventeenth, Europe continued the growth that had lifted it out of the relatively less prosperous medieval period (from the mid 400s to the late 1400s). Among the key factors behind this growth were increased agricultural productivity and an expansion of trade.
Populations cannot grow unless the rural economy can produce enough additional food to feed more people. During the sixteenth century, farmers brought more land into cultivation at the expense of forests and fens (low-lying wetlands). Dutch land reclamation in the Netherlands in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries provides the most spectacular example of the expansion of farmland: the Dutch reclaimed more than 36.000 acres from 1590 to 1615 alone.
Much of the potential for European economic development lay in what at first glance would seem to have been only sleepy villages. Such villages, however, generally lay in regions of relatively advanced agricultural production, permitting not only the survival of peasants but also the accumulation of an agricultural surplus for investment. They had access to urban merchants, markets, and trade routes.
Increased agricultural production in turn facilitated rural industry, an intrinsic part of the expansion of industry. Woolens and textile manufacturers, in particular, utilized rural cottage (in-home) production, which took advantage of cheap and plentiful rural labor. In the German states, the ravages of the Thirty Years' War (1618-1648) further moved textile production into the countryside. Members of poor peasant families spun or wove cloth and linens at home for scant remuneration in an attempt to supplement meager family income.
More extended trading networks also helped develop Europe's economy in this period. English and Dutch ships carrying rye from the Baltic states reached Spain and Portugal. Population growth generated an expansion of small-scale manufacturing, particularly of handicrafts, textiles, and metal production in England, Flanders, parts of northern Italy, the southwestern German states, and parts of Spain. Only iron smelting and mining required marshaling a significant amount of capital (wealth invested to create more wealth).
The development of banking and other financial services contributed to the expansion of trade. By the middle of the sixteenth century, financiers and traders commonly accepted bills of exchange in place of gold or silver for other goods. Bills of exchange, which had their origins in medieval Italy, were promissory notes (written promises to pay a specified amount of money by a certain date) that could be sold to third parties. In this way, they provided credit. At mid-century, an Antwerp financier only slightly exaggerated when he claimed, 0ne can no more trade without bills of exchange than sail without water."  Merchants no longer had to carry gold and silver over long, dangerous journeys. An Amsterdam merchant purchasing soap from a merchant in Marseille could go to an exchanger and pay the exchanger the equivalent sum in guilders, the Dutch currency. The exchanger would then send a bill of exchange to a colleague in Marseille, authorizing the colleague to pay the Marseille merchant in the merchant's own currency after the actual exchange of goods had taken place.

Bills of exchange contributed to the development of banks, as exchangers began to provide loans. Not until the eighteenth century, however, did such banks as the Bank of Amsterdam and the Bank of England begin to provide capital for business investment. Their principal function was to provide funds for the state.
The rapid expansion in international trade also benefitted from an infusion of capital, stemming largely from gold and silver brought by Spanish vessels from the Americas. This capital financed the production of goods, storage, trade, and even credit across Europe and overseas. Moreover an increased credit supply was generated by investments and loans by bankers and wealthy merchants to states and by joint-stock partnershipsan English innovation (the first major company began in 1600). Unlike short-term financial cooperation between investors for a single commercial undertaking, joint-stock companies provided permanent funding of capital by drawing on the investments of merchants and other investors who purchased shares in the company.
 
According to paragraph 1, what was true of Europe during the medieval period?
Agricultural productivity declined.
There was relatively little economic growth.
The general level of prosperity declined.
Foreign trade began to play an important role in the economy.
The word "key" in the passage is closest in meaning to
historical
many
important
hidden
According to paragraph 2, one effect of the desire to increase food production was that
land was cultivated in a different way
more farmers were needed
the rural economy was weakened
forests and wetlands were used for farming
According to paragraph 3, what was one reason villages had such great economic potential?
Villages were located in regions where agricultural production was relatively advanced.
Villages were relatively small in population and size compared with urban areas.
Some village inhabitants made investments in industrial development.
Village inhabitants established markets within their villages.
Paragraph 4 supports the idea that increased agricultural production was important for the expansion of industry primarily because it
increased the number of available workers in rural areas
provided new types of raw materials for use by industry
resulted in an improvement in the health of the rural cottage workers used by manufacturers
helped repair some of the ravages of the Thirty Years War
The word meager in the passage is closest in meaning to
very necessary
very low
traditional
primary
Why does the author mention that English and Dutch ships carrying rye from the Baltic states reached Spain and Portugal?
To suggest that England and the Netherlands were the two most important trading nations in seventeenth-century Europe
To suggest how extensive trading relations were
To contrast the importance of agricultural products with manufactured products
To argue that shipping introduced a range of new products
By including the quotation in paragraph 6 by the financier from Antwerp, the author is emphasizing that
sailing was an important aspect of the economy
increasing the number of water routes made trade possible
bills of exchange were necessary for successful trading
financiers often exaggerated the need for bills of exchange
According to paragraph 6, merchants were able to avoid the risk of carrying large amounts of gold and silver by
using third parties in Marseille to buy goods for them
doing all their business by using Dutch currency
paying for their purchases through bills of exchange
waiting to pay for goods until the goods had been delivered
According to paragraph 7, until the eighteenth century, it was the principal function of which of the following to provide funds for the state?
Bills of exchange
Exchangers who took loans
Banks
Business investment
The phrase an English innovation in the passage is closest in meaning to
a new development introduced by the English
an arrangement found only in England
a type of agreement negotiated in English
a type of partnership based on English law
According to paragraph 8, each of the following was a source of funds used to finance economic expansion EXCEPT
groups of investors engaged in short-term financial cooperation
the state
wealthy merchants
joint-stock companies

At the end of the nineteenth century, there were basically two kinds of buildings in the United States. On one hand were the buildings produced for the wealthy or for civic purposes, which tended to echo the architecture of the past and to use traditional styles of ornamentation. On the other hand were purely utilitarian structures, such as factories and grain elevators, which employed modern materials such as steel girders and plate glass in an undisguised and unadorned manner. Such buildings, however, were viewed in a category separate from "fine" architecture, and in fact were often designed by engineers and builders rather than architects. The development of modern architecture might in large part be seen as an adaptation of this sort of functional building and its pervasive application for daily use. Indeed, in this influential book Toward a New Architecture, the Swiss architect Le Corbusier illustrated his text with photographs of American factories and grain storage silos, as well as ships, airplanes, and other industrial objects. Nonetheless, modern architects did not simply employ these new materials in a strictly practical fashionthey consciously exploited their aesthetic possibilities. For example, glass could be used to open up walls and eliminate their stone and brick masonry because large spaces could now be spanned with steel beams.
The fundamental premise of modern architecture was that the appearance of the building should exhibit the nature of its materials and forms of physical support. This often led to effects that looked odd from a traditional standpoint but that became hallmarks of modern architecture for precisely this reason. For example, in traditional architecture, stone or brick walls served a structural role, but in a steel-beam building the walls were essentially hung from the internal skeleton of steel beams, which meant that walls and corners no longer needed to be solid but could be opened up in unexpected ways. At the Fagus shoe factory in Germany, for example, German architect Walter Gropius placed glass walls in the corners, effectively breaking open the box of traditional architecture and creating a new sense of light and openness. Similarly, steel beams could be used to construct balconies that projected out from the building without any support beneath them. These dramatic balconies quickly became a signature of modern architects such as Frank Lloyd Wright. Wright's most dramatic residence, Fallingwater, has balconies that thrust far out over a stream in a way that seems to defy gravity.
The ways in which new technology transformed architectural design are dramatically illustrated through the evolution of the high-rise office building. After ten or twelve stories, masonry construction reaches a maximum possible height, since it runs into difficulties of compression and of inadequate lateral strength to combat wind shear. Steel construction, on the other hand, can support a building of 50 or 100 stories without difficulty. Such buildings were so different from any previous form of architecture that they quickly acquired a new namethe skyscraper.
From the standpoint of real estate developers, the purpose of skyscrapers was to increase rental space in valuable urban locations. But to create usable high-rise buildings, a number of technical challenges needed to be solved. One problem was getting people to the upper floors, since after five or six stories it becomes exhausting to climb stairs. Updated and electrified versions of the freight elevator that had been introduced by Elisha Graves Otis in 1853 (several decades before skyscraper construction) solved this problem. Another issue was fire safety. The metal supporting buildings became soft when exposed to fire and collapsed relatively quickly. (They could melt at 2700 Fahrenheit, whereas major fires achieve temperatures of 3000degrees). However, when the metal is encased in fire-retardant materials, its vulnerability to fire is much decreased.  In Chicago, a system was developed for surrounding the metal components with hollow tiles made from brick-like terra-cotta.  Such tiles are impervious to fire. The terra-cotta tiles were used both to encase the supporting members and as flooring.   A structure built with steel beams protected by terra-cotta tiles was still three times lighter than a comparably sized building that used masonry construction, so the weight of the tiles was not a problem. 
 
The word "pervasive" in the passage is closest in meaning to
innovation
skilled
eventual
widespread
The word "eliminate" in the passage is closest in meaning to
get rid of
avoid
minimize
replace
Why does the author mention that Le Corbusier included "photographs of American factories and grain storage silos, as well as ships, airplanes, and other industrial objects" in Toward a New Architecture?
To argue that Le Corbusier should be considered more of a builder or an engineer than an architect.
To support the claim that modern architects was influenced by practical structures and the ways they were built.
To provide evidence that modern architects were more concerned with practicality than with aesthetics.
To document how architects moved from designing only buildings to designing vehicles and industrial objects.
Which of the following is NOT mentioned in paragraph 1 as distinguishing the two kinds of buildings in the United States at the end of the nineteenth century?
Function
Cost
Material
Ornamentation
The word "exhibit in the passage is closest in meaning to
show
determine
make attractive
include
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
The structural role of steel beams made it possible to hang stone or brick walls instead of using them for support as traditional architecture had.
Opening up walls and corners was unimportant in traditional architecture so walls and corners were solid until steel-beam buildings were designed.
In steel-beam buildings, the beams provide the structural support, so walls and corners can be opened up in ways not possible in traditional architecture.
In a steel-beam buildings the walls are essentially hung from the internal skeleton of steel beams, which means that stone and brick masonry are not needed.
It can be inferred from paragraph 2 that all of the following features of modern architecture seemed odd from the standpoint of traditional architecture EXCEPT
the use of glass walls
the sense of light and openness
the construction of balconies with solid supports beneath them
the hanging of walls from an internal structure of steel beams
According to paragraph 3, which of the following is true of steel-frame buildings?
They cannot be more than 50 stories high.
They cannot successfully combat wind shear.
They have greater lateral strength than masonry buildings.
They are usually skyscrapers.
The phrase impervious to" in the passage is closest in meaning to
hardened by
transformed by
manufactured with
unaffected by
According to paragraph 4, who benefited from solving problems associated with skyscraper construction?
The inventor of the elevator, Elisha Graves Otis.
Engineers and construction workers.
People who used the lower floors of tall buildings.
Real estate developers.
In paragraph 4, the author provides information about the melting point of metal in order to
explain why fire safety was a crucial issue for steel-frame buildings
describe the process by which steel is molded into beams
argue that there is no way to make steel buildings safe
support the position that steel was not a good material for use in tall buildings
According to paragraph 4, why were terra-cotta tiles used in buildings with steel beams?
Terra-cotta is lighter than steel.
Terra-cotta is a fire-retardant material.
Terra-cotta tiles were as cheap as bricks.
Terra-cotta tiles could be used for flooring.

Actors, even when they are well rehearsed, can never fully anticipate how well they will perform before an actual audience. The actor who has been brilliant in rehearsal can crumble before an audience and completely lose the edge of his or her performance in the face of stage fright and apprehension. The presence of an audience can affect performance in other ways as well. Orand this is more likelyan actor who seemed fairly unexciting at rehearsal can suddenly take fire and dazzle the audience with unexpected energy, subtlety, and depth. One celebrated example of this phenomenon was achieved by Lee J. Cobb in the original production of Arthur Millers Death of a Salesman, in which Cobb had the title role. Roles rehearsed in all solemnity can suddenly turn comical in performance; conversely, roles developed for comic potential in rehearsal may be received soberly by an audience and lose their comedic aspect entirely.
Sudden and dramatic change, however, is not the norm as the performance phase replaces rehearsal: most actors cross over from final dress rehearsal to opening night with only the slightest shift; indeed, this is generally thought to be the goal of a disciplined and professional rehearsal schedule. Holding back until opening night, the once-popular acting practice of restraining emotional display until opening night, is universally disavowed today, and opening night recklessness is viewed as a sure sign of the amateur, who relies primarily on guts and adrenaline to get through the performance. Deliberate revision of a role in performance, in response to the first waves of laughter or applause, is similarly frowned upon in all but the most inartistic of theaters today.
Nevertheless, a fundamental shift does occur in the actors awareness between rehearsal and performance, and this cannot and should not be denied; indeed, it is essential to the creation of theater art. This shift is set up by an elementary feedback: the actor is inevitably aware, with at least a portion of his or her mind, of the audiences reaction to his or her own performance and that of the other players; there is always, in any acting performance, a subtle adjustment to the audience that sees it. The outward manifestations of this adjustment are usually all but imperceptible: the split-second hold for a laugh to die down, the slight special projection of a certain line to make sure that it reaches the back row, the quick turn of a head to make a characterization or plot transition extra clear.
In addition, the best actors consistently radiate a quality known to the theater world as presence. It is a quality difficult to describe, but it has the effect of making both the character whom the actor portrays and the self of the actor who represents that character especially vibrant and in the present for the audience; it is the quality of an actor who takes the stage and acknowledges, in some inexplicable yet indelible manner, that he or she is there to be seen. Performance is not a one-way statement given from the stage to the house; it is a two-way participatory communication between the actors and the audience members in which the former employ text and movement and the latter employ applause, laughter, silence, and attention.
Even when the audience is silent and invisibleand, owing to the brightness of the stage lights, the audience is frequently invisible to the actorthe performer feels its presence. There is nothing extrasensory about this: the absence of sound is itself a signal, for when several hundred people sit without shuffling, coughing, or muttering, their silence betokens a level of attention for which the actor customarily strives. Laughter, gasps, sighs, and applause similarly feed back into the actors consciousnessand unconsciousnessand spur (or sometimes, alas, distract)the actors efforts. The veteran actor can determine quickly how to ride the crest of audience laughter and how to hold the line just long enough that it will pierce the lingering chuckles but not be overridden by them; he or she also knows how to vary the pace and/or redouble his or her energy when sensing restlessness or boredom on the other side of the curtain line. Performance technique, or the art of reading an audience, is more instinctual than learned. The timing it requires is of such complexity that no actor could master it rationally; he or she can develop it only out of experience.
 
The word celebrated in the passage is closest in meaning to
typical
specific
unusual
famous
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 1 about Lee J. Cobbs performance in Death of a Salesman?
His performance showed that an actor can change the nature of a role intended to be serious to comic role.
His performance before the live audience probably would have been different it there had been more time spent on rehearsal.
Those who had observed his acting of the part in rehearsal were unprepared for the quality of his performance before a live audience.
His way of presenting the main character in the original production of the play became the usual way that character was portrayed in later productions.
The author uses the word conversely to indicate that what follows the word is
in addition to what was stated before this word
the reverse of what was stated before this word
worse than what was stated before this word
another example of what was stated before this word
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Actors always devote some portion of their minds to establishing an elementary feedback between their own performance and the reactions of others to it.
An elementary feedback makes actors aware of changes in the reactions of the other actors and of the audience.
On some level, actors are always aware of the audiences reactions both to them and to the other actors and make slight changes in response to them.
During a performance, actors inevitably shift their focus from the reactions of the other actors to the reactions of the audience.
Why does the author mention the quick turn of a head in the passage?
To illustrate the kind of subtle adjustment that an actor might make during a performance
To indicate what actors may do while they wait for the audience's laughter to die down
To explain why audiences sometimes do not notice how actors have responded to them
To explain how actors can make sure that a certain line projects all the way to the back row
In paragraph 4, why does the author comment that performance is not a one-way statement but rather a two-way participatory communication?
To explain why presence is so well known in the theater
To explain the importance of the interaction of audience and actors in live performances
To describe a particular acting technique
To suggest that presence is created primarily through visual means
The word spur in the passage is closest in meaning to
reward
express
determine
stimulate
According to paragraph 5, what does the absence of sounds from the audience indicate?
The actor may have surprised or confused the audience.
The actor has succeeded in getting the audiences attention.
The audience wants to avoid distracting the actor.
The audience has become invisible to the actor.

It has long been accepted that the Americas were colonized by a migration of peoples from Asia, slowly traveling across a land bridge called Beringia (now the Bering Strait between northeastern Asia and Alaska) during the last Ice Age.  The first water craft theory about the migration was that around 11,000-12,000 years ago there was an ice-free corridor stretching from eastern Beringia to the areas of North America south of the great northern glaciers. It was the midcontinental corridor between two massive ice sheets-the Laurentide to the west-that enabled the southward migration.  But belief in this ice-free corridor began to crumble when paleoecologist Glen MacDonald demonstrated that some of the most important radiocarbon dates used to support the existence of an ice-free corridor were incorrect.  He persuasively argued that such an ice-free corridor did not exist until much later, when the continental ice began its final retreat.  

Support is growing for the alternative theory that people using watercraft, possibly skin boats, moved southward from Beringia along the Gulf of Alaska and then southward along the Northwest coast of North America possibly as early as 16,000 years ago. This route would have enabled humans to enter southern areas of the Americas prior to the melting of the continental glaciers. Until the early 1970s,most archaeologists did not consider the coast a possible migration route into the Americas because geologists originally believed that during the last Ice Age the entire Northwest Coast was covered by glacial ice. It had been assumed that the ice extended westward from the Alaskan/Canadian mountains to the very edge of the continental shelf, the flat, submerged part of the continent that extends into the ocean. This would have created a barrier of ice extending from the Alaska Peninsula, through the Gulf of Alaska and southward along the Northwest Coast of north America to what is today the state of Washington.
The most influential proponent of the coastal migration route has been Canadian archaeologist Knut Fladmark. He theorized that with the use of watercraft, people gradually colonized unglaciated refuges and areas along the continental shelf exposed by the lower sea level. Fladmarks hypothesis received additional support from the fact that the greatest diversity in native American languages occurs along the west coast of the Americas, suggesting that this region has been settled the longest.
More recent geologic studies documented deglaciation and the existence of ice-free areas throughout major coastal areas of British Columbia, Canada, by 13,000 years ago. Research now indicates that sizable areas of southeastern Alaska along the inner continental shelf were not covered by ice toward the end of the last Ice Age. One study suggests that except for a 250-mile coastal area between southwestern British Columbia and Washington State, the Northwest Coast of North America was largely free of ice by approximately 16,000 years ago. Vast areas along the coast may have been deglaciated beginning around 16,000 years ago, possibly providing a coastal corridor for the movement of plants, animals, and humans sometime between 13,000 and 14,000 years ago.
The coastal hypothesis has gained increasing support in recent years because the remains of large land animals, such as caribou and brown bears, have been found in southeastern Alaska dating between 10,000 and 12,500 years ago. This is the time period in which most scientists formerly believed the area to be inhospitable for humans. It has been suggested that if the environment were capable of supporting breeding populations of bears, there would have been enough food resources to support humans. Fladmark and other believe that the first human colonization of America occurred by boat along the Northwest Coast during the very late Ice Age, possibly as early as 14,000 years ago. The most recent geologic evidence indicates that it may have been possible for people to colonize ice-free regions along the continental shelf that were still exposed by the lower sea level between13,000 and 14,000 years ago.
The coastal hypothesis suggests an economy based on marine mammal hunting, saltwater fishing gathering, and the use of watercraft. Because of the barrier of ice to the east, the Pacific Ocean to the west, and populated areas to the north, there may have been a greater impetus for people to move in a southerly direction.
 
According to paragraph 1, the theory that people first migrated to the Americans by way of an ice-free corridor was seriously called into question by
paleoecologist Glen MacDonald's argument that the original migration occurred much later than had previously been believed
the demonstration that certain previously accepted radiocarbon dates were incorrect
evidence that the continental ice began its final retreat much later than had previously been believed
research showing that the ice-free corridor was not as long lasting as had been widely assumed
The word persuasively in the passage is closest in meaning to
aggressively
inflexibly
convincingly
carefully
Paragraph 2 begins by presenting a theory and then goes on to
discuss why the theory was rapidly accepted but then rejected
present the evidence on which the theory was based
cite evidence that now shows that the theory is incorrect
explain why the theory was not initially considered plausible
The phrase prior to is closest in meaning to
before
immediately after
during
in spite of
Paragraph 2 supports the idea that, before the 1970s, most archaeologists held which of the following views about the earliest people to reach the Americas?
They could not have sailed directly from Beringia to Alaska and then southward because, it was thought, glacial ice covered the entire coastal region.
They were not aware that the climate would continue to become milder.
They would have had no interest in migrating southward from Beringia until after the continental glaciers had begun to melt.
They lacked the navigational skills and appropriate boats needed long-distance trips.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways to leave out essential information.
Because this region has been settled the longest, it also displays the greatest diversity in Native American languages.
Fladmark's hypothesis states that the west coast of the Americas has been settled longer than any other region.
The fact that the greatest diversity of Native American languages occurs along the west coast of the Americans lends strength to Fradmark's hypothesis.
According to Fladmark, Native American languages have survived the longest along the west coast of the Americas.
The author's purpose in paragraph 4 is to
indicate that a number of recent geologic studies seem to provide support for the coastal hypothesis
indicate that coastal and inland migrations may have happened simultaneously
explain why humans may have reached America's northwest coast before animals and plants did
show that the coastal hypothesis may explain how people first reached Alaska but it cannot explain how people reached areas like modern British Columbia and Washington State
The word Vast in the passage is closest in meaning to
Frozen
Various
Isolated
Huge
According to paragraph 5, the discovery of the remains of large land animals supports the coastal hypothesis by providing evidence that
humans were changing their hunting techniques to adapt to coastal rather than inland environments
animals had migrated from the inland to the coasts, an indication that a midcontinental ice-free corridor was actually implausible
humans probably would have been able to find enough resources along the coastal corridor
the continental shelf was still exposed by lower sea levels during the period when the southward migration of people began
The word inhospitable in the passage is closest in meaning to
not familiar
not suitable
not dangerous
not reachable
According to paragraph 5, the most recent geologic research provides support for a first colonization of America dating as far back as
16,000 years ago
14,000 years ago
12,500 years ago
10,000 years ago
The word impetus in the passage is closest in meaning to
chance
protection
possibility
incentive

Teachers, it is thought, benefit from the practice of reflection, the conscious act of thinking deeply about and carefully examining the interactions and events within their own classrooms. Educators T. Wildman and J. Niles (1987) describe a scheme for developing reflective practice in experienced teachers. This was justified by the view that reflective practice could help teachers to feel more intellectually involved in their role and work in teaching and enable them to cope with the paucity of scientific fact and the uncertainty of knowledge in the discipline of teaching.
Wildman and Niles were particularly interested in investigating the conditions under which reflection might flourisha subject on which there is little guidance in the literature. They designed an experimental strategy for a group of teachers in Virginia and worked with 40 practicing teachers over several years. They were concerned that many would be drawn to these new, refreshing conceptions of teaching only to find that the void between the abstractions and the realities of teacher reflection is too great to bridge. Reflection on a complex task such as teaching is not easy. The teachers were taken through a program of talking about teaching events, moving on to reflecting about specific issues in a supported, and later an independent, manner.
Wildman and Niles observed that systematic reflection on teaching required a sound ability to understand classroom events in an objective manner. They describe the initial understanding in the teachers with whom they were working as being utilitarian  and not rich or detailed enough to drive systematic reflection. Teachers rarely have the time or opportunities to view their own or the teaching of others in an objective manner. Further observation revealed the tendency of teachers to evaluate events rather than review the contributory factors in a considered manner by, in effect, standing outside the situation.
 Helping this group of teachers to revise their thinking about classroom events became central.
 This process took time and patience and effective trainers.  The researchers estimate that the initial training of the teachers to view events objectively took between 20 and 30 hours, 
with the same number of hours again being required to  practice the skills of reflection.                             
  Wildman and Niles identify three principles that facilitate reflective practice in a teaching situation.
 The first is support from administrators in an education system, enabling teachers to understand the requirements of reflective practice and how it relates to teaching students. The second is the availability of sufficient time and space. The teachers in the program described how they found it difficult to put aside the immediate demands of others in order 
to give themselves the time they needed to develop their reflective skills. The third is the development of a collaborative environment with support from other teachers. Support and encouragement were also required to help teachers in the program cope with aspects of their professional life with which they were not comfortable. Wildman and Niles make a summary comment: Perhaps the most important thing we learned is the idea of the teacher-as-reflective-practitioner will not happen simply 
because it is a good or even compelling idea.                             
The work of Wildman and Niles suggests the importance of recognizing some of the difficulties of instituting reflective practice. Others have noted this, making a similar point about the teaching professions cultural inhibitions about reflective practice. Zeichner and Liston (1987) point out the inconsistency between the role of the teacher as a (reflective) professional decision maker and the more usual role of the teacher as a technician, putting into practice the ideas of theirs. More basic than the cultural issues is the matter of motivation. Becoming a reflective practitioner requires extra work (Jaworski, 1993) and has only vaguely defined goals with, perhaps, little initially perceivable reward and the threat of vulnerability. Few have directly questioned what might lead a teacher to want to become reflective. Apparently, the most obvious reason for teachers to work toward reflective practice is that teacher educators think it is a good thing. There appear to be many unexplored matters about the motivation to reflect  for example, the value of externally motivated reflection as opposed to that of teachers who might reflect by habit.
 
The word justified in the passage is closest in meaning to
supported
shaped
stimulated
suggested
According to paragraph 1, it was believed that reflection could help teachers
understand intellectual principles of teaching
strengthen their intellectual connection to their work
use scientific fact to improve discipline and teaching
adopt a more disciplined approach to teaching
The word flourish in the passage is closest in meaning to
continue
occur
succeed
apply
All of the following are mentioned about the experimental strategy described in paragraph 2 EXCEPT:
It was designed so that teachers would eventually reflect without help from others.
It was used by a group of teachers over a period of years.
It involved having teachers take part in discussions of classroom events.
It involved having teachers record in writing their reflections about teaching.
According to paragraph 2, Wildman and Niles worried that the teachers they were working with might feel that
the number of teachers involved in their program was too large
the concepts of teacher reflection were so abstract that they could not be applied
the ideas involved in reflection were actually not new and refreshing
several years would be needed to acquire the habit of reflecting on their teaching
The word objective in the passage is closest in meaning to
unbiased
positive
systematic
thorough
According to paragraph 3, what did the teachers working with Wildman and Niles often fail to do when they attempted to practice reflection?
Correctly calculate the amount of time needed for reflection.
Provide sufficiently detailed descriptions of the methods they used to help them reflect.
Examine thoughtfully the possible causes of events in their classrooms.
Establish realistic goals for themselves in practicing reflection.
How is paragraph 4 related to other aspects of the discussion of reflection in the passage?
It describes and comments on steps taken to overcome problems identified earlier in the passage.
It challenges the earlier claim that teachers rarely have the time to think about their own or others' teaching.
It identifies advantages gained by teachers who followed the training program described earlier in the passage.
It explains the process used to define the principles discussed later in the passage.
The word compelling in the passage is closest in meaning to
commonly held
persuasive
original
practical
According to paragraph 6, teachers may be discouraged from reflecting because
it is not generally supported by teacher educators
the benefits of reflection may not be apparent immediately
it is impossible to teach and reflect on one's teaching at the same time
they have often failed in their attempts to become reflective practitioners
Which of the sentences below expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information
The practice of being reflective is no longer simply a habit among teachers but something that is externally motivated.
Most teachers need to explore ways to form the habit of reflection even when no external motivation exists.
Many aspects of the motivation to reflect have not been studied, including the comparative benefits of externally motivated and habitual reflection among teachers.
There has not been enough exploration of why teachers practice reflection as a habit with or without external motivation.

When the Hawaiian Islands emerged from the sea as volcanoes, starting about five million years ago, they were far removed from other landmasses. Then, as blazing sunshine alternated with drenching rains, the harsh, barren surfaces of the black rocks slowly began to soften. Winds brought a variety of life-forms.
Spores light enough to float on the breezes were carried thousands of miles from more ancient lands and deposited at random across the bare mountain flanks. A few of these spores found a toehold on the dark, forbidding rocks and grew and began to work their transformation upon the land. Lichens were probably the first successful flora. These are not single individual plants; each one is a symbiotic combination of an alga and a fungus. The algae capture the sun's energy by photosynthesis and store it in organic molecules. The fungi absorb moisture and mineral salts from the rocks, passing these on in waste products that nourish algae. It is significant that the earliest living thing that built communities on these islands are examples of symbiosis, a phenomenon that depends upon the close cooperation of two or more forms of life and a principle that is very important in island communities.
Lichens helped to speed the decomposition of the hard rock surfaces, preparing a soft bed of soil that was abundantly supplied with minerals that had been carried in the molten rock from the bowels of Earth. Now, other forms of life could take hold: ferns and mosses (two of the most ancient types of land plants) that flourish even in rock crevices.  These plants propagate by producing sporestiny fertilized cells that contain all the instructions for making a new plantbut the spore are unprotected by any outer coating and carry no supply of nutrient.  Vast numbers of them fall on the ground beneath the mother plants.  Sometimes they are carried farther afield by water or by wind.  But only those few spores that settle down in very favorable locations can start new life; the vast majority fall on barren ground. By force of sheer numbers, however, the mosses and ferns reached Hawaii, survived, and multiplied. Some species developed great size, becoming tree ferns that even now grow in the Hawaiian forests.
Many millions of years after ferns evolved (but long before the Hawaiian Islands were born from the sea), another kind of flora evolved on Earth: the seed-bearing plants. This was a wonderful biological invention. The seed has an outer coating that surrounds the genetic material of the new plant, and inside this covering is a concentrated supply of nutrients. Thus the seeds chances of survival are greatly enhanced over those of the naked spore. One type of seed-bearing plant, the angiosperm, includes all forms of blooming vegetation. In the angiosperm the seeds are wrapped in an additional layer of covering. Some of these coats are hardlike the shell of a nutfor extra protection. Some are soft and tempting, like a peach or a cherry. In some angiosperms the seeds are equipped with gossamer wings, like the dandelion and milkweed seeds. These new characteristics offered better ways for the seed to move to new habitats. They could travel through the air, float in water, and lie dormant for many months.
Plants with large, buoyant seedslike coconutsdrift on ocean currents and are washed up on the shores. Remarkably resistant to the vicissitudes of ocean travel, they can survive prolonged immersion in saltwater when they come to rest on warm beaches and the conditions are favorable, the seed coats soften. Nourished by their imported supply of nutrients, the young plants push out their roots and establish their place in the sun.
By means of these seeds, plants spread more widely to new locations, even to isolated islands like the Hawaiian archipelago, which lies more than 2,000 miles west of California and 3,500 miles east of Japan. The seeds of grasses, flowers, and blooming trees made the long trips to these islands. (Grasses are simple forms of angiosperms that bear their encapsulated seeds on long stalks.) In a surprisingly short time, angiosperms filled many of the land areas on Hawaii that had been bare.
 
The phrase at random in the passage is closest in meaning to
finally
over a long period of time
successfully
without a definite pattern
It can be inferred from paragraph 2 that the fungi in lichens benefit from their symbiotic relationship with algae in what way?
The algae help the fungi meet some of their energy needs.
The algae protect the fungi from the Sun's radiation.
The algae provide the fungi with greater space for absorbing water.
The fungi produce less waste in the presence of algae.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Some of the earliest important examples of symbiosisthe close cooperation of two or more living thingsoccur in island communities.
Symbiosisthe close cooperation of pairs or small groups of living organismsis especially important in these island environments.
The first organisms on these islands worked together closely in a relationship known as symbiosis, which is particularly important on islands.
It is significant to note that organisms in the beginning stages of the development of island life cannot survive without close cooperation.
The word abundantly in the passage is closest in meaning to
occasionally
plentifully
usefully
fortunately
The word propagate in the passage is closest in meaning to
multiply
emerge
live
evolve
According to paragraph 3, what was the relationship between lichens and ferns in the development of plant life on Hawaii?
Ferns were able to grow because lichens created suitable soil.
The decomposition of ferns produced minerals that were used by lichens.
Lichens and ferns competed to grow in the same rocky environments.
Lichens and ferns were typically found together in volcanic areas.
The word This in the passage refers to
the spread of ferns and mosses in Hawaii
the creation of the Hawaiian Islands
the evolution of ferns
the development of plants that produce seeds
According to paragraph 4, why do seeds have a greater chance of survival than spores do? To receive credit, you must select TWO answer choices.
Seeds need less water to grow into a mature plant than spores do.
Seeds do not need to rely on outside sources of nutrients.
Seeds are better protected from environmental dangers than spores are.
Seeds are heavier than spores and are therefore more likely to take root and grow.
Why does the author mention a nut, a peach, and a cherry?
To indicate that some seeds are less likely to survive than others
To point out that many angiosperms can be eaten
To provide examples of blooming plants
To illustrate the variety of coverings among angiosperm seeds
The word dormant in the passage is closest in meaning to
hidden
inactive
underground
preserved
According to paragraph 5, a major reason that coconuts can establish themselves in distant locations is that their seeds can
survive long exposure to heat on island beaches
float and survive for long periods in ocean water
use saltwater for maintenance and growth
maintain hard, protective coats even after growing roots
According to the passage, which of the following characteristics do spores and seeds have in common?
They may be surrounded by several layers of covering.
They are produced by flowering plants.
They may be spread by wind.
They are able to grow in barren soils.

Paleontologists have argued for a long time that the demise of the dinosaurs was caused by climatic alterations associated with slow changes in the positions of continents and seas resulting from plate tectonics. Off and on throughout the Cretaceous (the last period of the Mesozoic era, during which dinosaurs flourished), large shallow seas covered extensive areas of the continents. Data from diverse sources, including geochemical evidence preserved in seafloor sediments, indicate that the Late Cretaceous climate was milder than todays. The days were not too hot, nor the nights too cold. The summers were not too warm, nor the winters too frigid. The shallow seas on the continents probably buffered the temperature of the nearby air, keeping it relatively constant.
At the end of the Cretaceous, the geological record shows that these seaways retreated from the continents back into the major ocean basins. No one knows why. Over a period of about 100,000 years, while the seas pulled back, climates around the world became dramatically more extreme: warmer days, cooler nights; hotter summers, colder winters. Perhaps dinosaurs could not tolerate these extreme temperature changes and became extinct.
If true, though, why did cold-blooded animals such as snakes, lizards, turtles, and crocodiles survive the freezing winters and torrid summers? These animals are at the mercy of the climate to maintain a livable body temperature. Its hard to understand why they would not be affected, whereas dinosaurs were left too crippled to cope, especially if, as some scientists believe, dinosaurs were warm-blooded. Critics also point out that the shallow seaways had retreated from and advanced on the continents numerous times during the Mesozoic, so why did the dinosaurs survive the climatic changes associated with the earlier fluctuations but not with this one? Although initially appealing, the hypothesis of a simple climatic change related to sea levels is insufficient to explain all the data.
Dissatisfaction with conventional explanations for dinosaur extinctions led to a surprising observation that, in turn, has suggested a new hypothesis. Many plants and animals disappear abruptly from the fossil record as one moves from layers of rock documenting the end of the Cretaceous up into rocks representing the beginning of the Cenozoic (the era after the Mesozoic). Between the last layer of Cretaceous rock and the first layer of Cenozoic rock, there is often a thin layer of clay. Scientists felt that they could get an idea of how long the extinctions took by determining how long it took to deposit this one centimeter of clay and they thought they could determine the time it took to deposit the clay by determining the amount of the element iridium (Ir) it contained.
 Ir has not been common at Earths since the very beginning of the planets history. Because it usually exists in a metallic state, 
it was preferentially incorporated in Earths core as the planet cooled and consolidated. Ir is found in high concentrations in some meteorites,
in which the solar systems original chemical composition is preserved. Even today, microscopic meteorites continually bombard Earth, falling on both land and sea. 
By measuring how many of these meteorites fall to Earth over a given period of time, scientists can estimate how long it might have taken to deposit the observed amount of Ir in the boundary clay. 
 These calculations suggest that a period of about one million years would have been required. However, other reliable evidence suggests that the deposition of the boundary clay could not 
have taken one million years.  So the unusually high concentration of Ir seems to require a special explanation.   
In view of these facts, scientists hypothesized that a single large asteroid, about 10 to 15 kilometers across, collided with Earth, and the resulting fallout created the boundary clay. Their calculations show that the impact kicked up a dust cloud that cut off sunlight for several months, inhibiting photosynthesis in plants; decreased surface temperatures on continents to below freezing; caused extreme episodes of acid rain; and significantly raised long-term global temperatures through the greenhouse effect. This disruption of food chain and climate would have eradicated the dinosaurs and other organisms in less than fifty years.
 
According to paragraph 1, which of the following is true of the Late Cretaceous climate?
Summers were very warm and winters were very cold.
Shallow seas on the continents caused frequent temperature changes.
The climate was very similar to todays climate.
The climate did not change dramatically from season to season.
Which of the following reasons is suggested in paragraph 2 for the extinction of the dinosaurs?
Changes in the lengths of the days and nights during the late Cretaceous period
Droughts caused by the movement of seaways back into the oceans
The change from mild to severe climates during the Late Cretaceous period
An extreme decrease in the average yearly temperature over 10,ooo years
Why does the author mention the survival of snakes, lizards, turtles, and crocodiles in paragraph 3?
To argue that dinosaurs may have become extinct because they were not cold-blooded animals
To question the adequacy of the hypothesis that climatic change related to sea levels caused the extinction of the dinosaurs
To present examples of animals that could maintain a livable body temperature more easily than dinosaurs
To support a hypothesis that these animals were not as sensitive to climate changes in the Cretaceous period as they are today
The word cope in the passage is closest in meaning to
adapt
move
continue
compete
According to paragraph 3, which of the following is true of changes in climate before the Cretaceous period and the effect of these changes on dinosaurs?
Climate changes associated with the movement of seaways before the Cretaceous period did not cause dinosaurs to become extinct.
Changes in climate before the Cretaceous period caused severe fluctuations in sea level, resulting in the extinction of the dinosaurs.
Frequent changes in climate before the Cretaceous period made dinosaurs better able to maintain a livable body temperature.
Before the Cretaceous period there were few changes in climate, and dinosaurs flourished.
The word fluctuations in the passage is closest in meaning to
extremes
retreats
periods
variations
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? In correct choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
The fossil record suggests that there was an abrupt extinction of many plants and animals at the end of the Mesozoic era.
Few fossils of the Mesozoic era have survived in the rocks that mark the end of the Cretaceous.
Fossils from the Cretaceous period of the Mesozoic up to the beginning of the Cenozoic era have been removed from the layers of rock that surrounded them.
Plants and animals from the Mesozoic era were unable to survive in the Cenozoic era.
In paragraph 4, all the following questions are answered EXCEPT:
Why is there a layer of clay between the rocks of the Cretaceous and Cenozoic?
Why were scientists interested in determining how long it took to deposit the layer of clay at the end of the Cretaceous?
What was the effect of the surprising observation scientists made?
Why did scientists want more information about the dinosaur extinctions at the end of the Cretaceous?
The word bombard in the passage is closest in meaning to
approach
strike
pass
circle
Paragraph 5 implies that a special explanation of Ir in the boundary clay is needed because
the Ir in microscopic meteorites reaching Earth during the Cretaceous period would have been incorporated into Earths core
the Ir in the boundary clay was deposited much more than a million years ago
the concentration of Ir in the boundary clay is higher than in microscopic meteorites
the amount of Ir in the boundary clay is too great to have come from microscopic meteorites during the time the boundary clay was deposited
The word disruption in the passage is closest in meaning to
exhaustion
disturbance
modification
disappearance
Paragraph 6 mentions all of the following effects of the hypothesized asteroid collision EXCEPT
a large dust cloud that blocked sunlight
an immediate drop in the surface temperatures of the continents
an extreme decrease in rainfall on the continents
a long-term increase in global temperatures

Photographic evidence suggests that liquid water once existed in great quantity on the surface of Mars. Two types of flow features are seen: runoff channels and outflow channels. Runoff channels are found in the southern highlands. These flow features are extensive systemssometimes hundreds of kilometers in total lengthof interconnecting, twisting channels that seem to merge into larger, wider channels. They bear a strong resemblance to river systems on Earth, and geologists think that they are dried-up beds of long-gone rivers that once carried rainfall on Mars from the mountains down into the valleys. Runoff channels on Mars speak of a time 4 billion years ago (the age of the Martian highlands), when the atmosphere was thicker, the surface warmer, and liquid water widespread.
 Outflow channels are probably relics of catastrophic flooding on Mars long ago.  They appear only in equatorial regions and generally do not form extensive interconnected networks.
 Instead, they are probably the paths taken by huge volumes of water draining from the southern highlands into the northern plains. 
 The onrushing water arising from these flash floods 
likely also formed the odd teardrop-shaped islands (resembling the miniature versions seen in the wet sand of our beaches at low tide) that have been found on the plains close to the
ends of the outflow channels.  Judging from the width and depth of the channels, the flow rates must have been truly enormousperhaps as much as a hundred times greater than the 105 tons per 
second carried by the great Amazon river. Flooding shaped the outflow channels approximately 3 billion years ago, about the same times as the northern volcanic plains formed.                             
Some scientists speculate that Mars may have enjoyed an extended early Period during which rivers, lakes, and perhaps even oceans adorned its surface. A 2003 Mars Global Surveyor image shows what mission specialists think may be a deltaa fan-shaped network of channels and sediments where a river once flowed into a larger body of water, in this case a lake filling a crater in the southern highlands. Other researchers go even further, suggesting that the data provide evidence for large open expenses of water on the early Martian surface. A computer-generated view of the Martian north polar region shows the extent of what may have been an ancient ocean covering much of the northern lowlands. The Hellas Basin, which measures some 3,000 kilometers across and has a floor that lies nearly 9 kilometers below the basins rim, is another candidate for an ancient Martian sea.
These ideas remain controversial. Proponents point to features such as the terraced beaches shown in one image, which could conceivably have been left behind as a lake or ocean evaporated and the shoreline receded. But detractors maintain that the terraces could also have been created by geological activity, perhaps related to the geologic forces that depressed the Northern Hemisphere far below the level of the south, in which case they have nothing whatever to do with Martian water. Furthermore, Mars Global Surveyor data released in 2003 seem to indicate that the Martian surface contains too few carbonate rock layerslayers containing compounds of carbon and oxygenthat should have been formed in abundance in an ancient ocean. Their absence supports the picture of a cold, dry Mars that never experienced the extended mild period required to form lakes and oceans. However, more recent data imply that at least some parts of the planet did in fact experience long periods in the past during which liquid water existed on the surface.
Aside from some small-scale gullies (channels) found since 2000, which are inconclusive, astronomers have no direct evidence for liquid water anywhere on the surface of Mars today, and the amount of water vapor in the Martian atmosphere is tiny. Yet even setting aside the unproven hints of ancient oceans, the extent of the outflow channels suggests that a huge total volume of water existed on Mars in the past. Where did all the water go? The answer may be that virtually all the water on Mars is now locked in the permafrost layer under the surface, with more contained in the planets polar caps.
 
The word merge in the passage is closest in meaning to
expand
separate
straighten out
combine
What does the discussion in paragraph 1 of runoff channels in the southern highlands suggest about Mars?
The atmosphere of Mars was once thinner than it is today.
Large amounts of rain once fell on parts of Mars.
The river systems of Mars were once more extensive than Earths.
The rivers of Mars began to dry up about 4 billion years ago.
The word relics in the passage is closest in meaning to
remains
sites
requirements
sources
The word miniature in the passage is closest in meaning to
temporary
small
multiple
familiar
In paragraph 2, why does the author include the information that 105 tons of water flow through the Amazon river per second?
To emphasize the great size of the volume of water that seems to have flowed through Mars outflow channels
To indicate data used by scientists to estimate how long ago Mars outflow channels were formed
To argue that flash floods on Mars may have been powerful enough to cause tear-shaped islands to form
To argue that the force of flood waters on Mars was powerful enough to shape the northern volcanic plains
According to paragraph 2, all of the following are true of the outflow channels on Mars EXCEPT:
They formed at around the same time that volcanic activity was occurring on the northern plains.
They are found only on certain parts of the Martian surface.
They sometimes empty onto what appear to have once been the wet sands of tidal beaches.
They are thought to have carried water northward from the equatorial regions.
All of the following questions about geological features on Mars are answered in paragraph 3 EXCEPT:
What are some regions of Mars that may have once been covered with an ocean?
Where do mission scientists believe that the river forming the delta emptied?
Approximately how many craters on Mars do mission scientists believe may once have been lakes filled with water?
During what period of Mars history do some scientists think it may have had large bodies of water?
According to paragraph 3, images of Mars surface have been interpreted as support for the idea that
the polar regions of Mars were once more extensive than they are now
a large part of the northern lowlands may once have been under water
deltas were once a common feature of the Martian landscape
the shape of the Hellas Basin has changed considerably over time
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
But detractors argue that geological activity may be responsible for the water associated with the terraces.
But detractors argue that the terraces may have been formed by geological activity rather than by the presence of water.
But detractors argue that the terraces may be related to geological forces in the Northern Hemisphere of Mars, rather than to Martian water in the south.
But detractors argue that geological forces depressed the Northern Hemisphere so far below the level of the south that the terraces could not have been formed by water.
According to paragraph 4, what do the 2003 Global Surveyor data suggest about Mars?
Ancient oceans on Mars contained only small amounts of carbon.
The climate of Mars may not have been suitable for the formation of large bodies of water.
Liquid water may have existed on some parts of Mars surface for long periods of time.
The ancient oceans that formed on Mars dried up during periods of cold, dry weather.
The word hints in the passage is closest in meaning to
clues
features
arguments
effects

There is a quality of cohesiveness about the Roman world that applied neither to Greece nor perhaps to any other civilization, ancient or modern. Like the stone of Roman wall, which were held together both by the regularity of the design and by that peculiarly powerful Roman cement, so the various parts of the Roman realm were bonded into a massive, monolithic entity by physical, organizational, and psychological controls. The physical bonds included the network of military garrisons, which were stationed in every province, and the network of stone-built roads that linked the provinces with Rome. The organizational bonds were based on the common principles of law and administration and on the universal army of officials who enforced common standards of conduct. The psychological controls were built on fear and punishmenton the absolute certainty that anyone or anything that threatened the authority of Rome would be utterly destroyed.
The source of Roman obsession with unity and cohesion may well have lain in the pattern of Romes early development. Whereas Greece had grown from scores of scattered cities, Rome grew from one single organism. While the Greek world had expanded along the Mediterranean seas lanes, the Roman world was assembled by territorial conquest. Of course, the contrast is not quite so stark: in Alexander the Great the Greeks had found the greatest territorial conqueror of all time; and the Romans, once they moved outside Italy, did not fail to learn the lessons of sea power. Yet the essential difference is undeniable. The key to the Greek world lay in its high-powered ships; the key to Roman power lay in its marching legions. The Greeks were wedded to the sea; the Romans, to the land. The Greek was a sailor at heart; the Roman, a landsman.
Certainly, in trying to explain the Roman phenomenon, one would have to place great emphasis on this almost instinct for the territorial imperative. Roman priorities lay in the organization, exploitation, and defense of their territory. In all probability it was the fertile plain of Latium, where the Latins who founded Rome originated, that created the habits and skills of landed settlement, landed property, landed economy, landed administration, and a land-based society. From this arose the Roman genius for military organization and orderly government. In turn, a deep attachment to the land, and to the stability which rural life engenders, fostered the Roman virtues: gravitas, a sense of responsibility, pietas, a sense of devotion to family and country, and iustitia, a sense of the natural order.
Modern attitudes to Roman civilization range from the infinitely impressed to the thoroughly disgusted.  As always, there are the power worshippers, especially among historians, who are predisposed to admire whatever is strong, who feel more attracted to the might of Rome than to the subtlety of Greece.  At the same time, there is a solid body of opinion that dislikes Rome.  For many, Rome is at best the imitator and the continuator of Greece on a larger scale.  Greek civilization had quality; Rome, mere quantity. Greece was original; Rome, derivative. Greece had style; Rome had money. Greece was the inventor; Rome, the research and development division. Such indeed was the opinion of some of the more intellectual Romans. Had the Greeks held novelty in such disdain as we, asked Horace in his epistle, what work of ancient date would now exist?
Romes debt to Greece was enormous. The Romans adopted Greek religion and moral philosophy. In literature, Greek writers were consciously used as models by their Latin successors. It was absolutely accepted that an educated Roman should be fluent in Greek. In speculative philosophy and the sciences, the Romans made virtually no advance on early achievements.
Yet it would be wrong to suggest that Rome was somehow a junior partner in Greco-Roman civilization. The Roman genius was projected into new spheresespecially into those of law, military organization, administration, and engineering. Moreover, the tensions that arose within the Roman state produced literary and artistic sensibilities of the highest order. It was no accident that many leading Roman soldiers and statesmen were writers of high caliber.
 
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
The regularity and power of stone walls inspired Romans attempting to unify the parts of their realm.
Although the Romans used different types of designs when building their walls, they used regular controls to maintain their realm.
Several types of control united the Roman realm, just as design and cement held Roman walls together.
Romans built walls to unite the various parts of their realm into a single entity, which was controlled by powerful laws.
According to paragraph 1, all of the following are controls that held together the Roman world EXCEPT
administrative and legal systems
the presence of the military
a common language
transportation networks
The phrase obsession with in the passage is closest in meaning to
thinking about
fixation on
interest in
attitude toward
According to paragraph 2, which of the following was NOT characteristic of Romes early development?
Expansion by sea invasion
Territorial expansion
Expansion from one original settlement
Expansion through invading armies
Why does the author mention Alexander the Great in the passage?
To acknowledge that Greek civilization also expanded by land conquest
To compare Greek leaders to Roman leaders
To give an example of Greek leader whom Romans studied
To indicate the superior organization of the Greek military
The word fostered in the passage is closest in meaning to
accepted
combined
introduced
encouraged
Paragraph 3 suggests which of the following about the people of Latium?
Their economy was based on trade relations with other settlements.
They held different values than the people of Rome.
Agriculture played a significant role in the society.
They possessed unusual knowledge of animal instincts.
Paragraph 4 indicates that some historians admire Roman civilization because of
the diversity of cultures within Roman society
its strength
its innovative nature
the large body of literature that it developed
In paragraph 4, the author develops a description of Roman civilization by
comparing the opinions of Roman intellectuals to Greek intellectuals
identifying which characteristics of Roman civilization were copied from Greece
explaining how the differences between Roman and Greece developed as time passed
contrasting characteristics of Roman civilization with characteristics of Greek civilization
According to paragraph 4, intellectual Romans such as Horace held which of the following opinions about their civilization?
Ancient works of Greece held little value in the Roman world.
The Greek civilization had been surpassed by the Romans.
Roman civilization produced little that was original or memorable.
Romans valued certain types of innovations that had been ignored by ancient Greeks.
The word spheres in the passage is closest in meaning to
abilities
areas
combinations
models
Which of the following statements about leading Roman soldiers and statesmen is supported by paragraphs 5 and 6?
They could read and write the Greek language.
They frequently wrote poetry and plays.
They focused their writing on military matters.
They wrote according to the philosophical laws of the Greeks.

There is evidence of agriculture in Africa prior to 3000 B.C. It may have developed independently, but many scholars believe that the spread of agriculture and iron throughout Africa linked it to the major centers of the Near East and Mediterranean world. The drying up of what is now the Sahara desert had pushed many peoples to the south into sub-Sahara Africa. These peoples settled at first in scattered hunting-and-gathering bands, although in some places near lakes and rivers, people who fished, with a more secure food supply, lived in larger population concentrations. Agriculture seems to have reached these people from the Near East, since the first domesticated crops were millets and sorghums whose origins are not African but west Asian. Once the idea of planting diffused, Africans began to develop their own crops, such as certain varieties of rice, and they demonstrated a continued receptiveness to new imports. The proposed areas of the domestication of African crops lie in a band that extends from Ethiopia across southern Sudan to West Africa. Subsequently, other crops, such as bananas, were introduced from Southeast Asia.
Livestock also came from outside Africa. Cattle were introduced from Asia, as probably were domestic sheep and goats. Horses were apparently introduced by the Hyksos invaders of Egypt (1780-1560 B.C.) and then spread across the Sudan to West Africa. Rock paintings in the Sahara indicate that horses and chariots were used to traverse the desert and that by 300-200 B.C., there were trade routes across the Sahara. Horses were adopted by peoples of the West African savannah, and later their powerful cavalry forces allowed them to carve out large empires. Finally, the camel was introduced around the first century A.D. This was an important innovation, because the camels abilities to thrive in harsh desert conditions and to carry large loads cheaply made it an effective and efficient means of transportation. The camel transformed the desert from a barrier into a still difficult, but more accessible, route of trade and communication.
Iron came from West Asia, although its routes of diffusion were somewhat different than those of agriculture. Most of Africa presents a curious case in which societies moved directly from a technology of stone to iron without passing through the intermediate stage of copper or bronze metallurgy, although some early copper-working sites have been found in West Africa. Knowledge of iron making penetrated into the forest and savannahs of West Africa at roughly the same time that iron making was reaching Europe. Evidence of iron making has been found in Nigeria, Ghana, and Mali.
This technological shift cause profound changes in the complexity of African societies. Iron represented power. In West Africa the blacksmith who made tools and weapons had an important place in society, often with special religious powers and functions. Iron hoes, which made the land more productive, and iron weapons, which made the warrior more powerful, had symbolic meaning in a number of West Africa societies. Those who knew the secrets of making iron gained ritual and sometimes political power.
Unlike in the Americas, where metallurgy was a very late and limited development, Africans had iron from a relatively early date, developing ingenious furnaces to produce the high heat needed for production and to control the amount of air that reached the carbon and iron ore necessary for making iron. Much of Africa moved right into the Iron Age, taking the basic technology and adapting it to local conditions and resources.
 The diffusion of agriculture and later of iron was accompanied by a great movement of people who may have carried these innovations. These people probably originated in eastern Nigeria.
 Their migration may have been set in motion by an increase in population caused by a movement of peoples fleeing the desiccation, or drying up, of the Sahara.
 They spoke a language, proto-Bantu (Bantu means the people), which is the parent tongue of a language of a large number of Bantu languages still spoken throughout sub-Sahara Africa.
Why and how these people spread out into central and southern Africa remains a mystery, but archaeologists believe that their iron weapons allowed them to conquer their hunting-gathering opponents,
who still used stone implements.  Still, the process is uncertain, and peaceful migrationor simply rapid demographic growthmay have also caused the Bantu explosion.  
 
The word diffused in the passage is closest in meaning to
emerged
was understood
spread
developed
According to paragraph 1, why do researchers doubt that agriculture developed independently in Africa?
African lakes and rivers already provided enough food for people to survive without agriculture.
The earliest examples of cultivated plants discovered in Africa are native to Asia.
Africas native plants are very difficult to domesticate.
African communities were not large enough to support agriculture.
In paragraph 1, what does the author imply about changes in the African environment during this time period?
The climate was becoming milder, allowing for a greater variety of crops to be grown.
Although periods of drying forced people south, they returned once their food supply was secure.
Population growth along rivers and lakes was dramatically decreasing the availability of fish.
A region that had once supported many people was becoming a desert where few could survive.
According to paragraph 2, camels were important because they
were the first domesticated animal to be introduced to Africa
allowed the people of the West African savannahs to carve out large empires
helped African peoples defend themselves against Egyptian invaders
made it cheaper and easier to cross the Sahara
According to paragraph 2, which of the following were subjects of rock paintings in the Sahara?
Horses and chariots
Sheep and goats
Hyksos invaders from Egypt
Camels and cattle
What function does paragraph 3 serve in the organization of the passage as a whole?
It contrasts the development of iron technology in West Asia and West Africa.
It discusses a non-agricultural contribution to Africa from Asia.
It introduces evidence that a knowledge of copper working reached Africa and Europe at the same time.
It compares the rates at which iron technology developed in different parts of Africa.
The word profound in the passage is closest in meaning to
fascinating
far-reaching
necessary
temporary
The word ritual in the passage is closest in meaning to
military
physical
ceremonial
permanent
According to paragraph 4, all of the following were social effects of the new metal technology in Africa EXCEPT:
Access to metal tools and weapons created greater social equality.
Metal weapons increased the power of warriors.
Iron tools helped increase the food supply.
Technical knowledge gave religious power to its holders.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
While American iron makers developed the latest furnaces, African iron makers continued using earlier techniques.
Africans produced iron much earlier than Americans, inventing technologically sophisticated heating systems.
Iron making developed earlier in Africa than in the Americas because of the ready availability of carbon and iron ore.
Both Africa and the Americas developed the capacity for making iron early, but African metallurgy developed at a slower rate.
The word fleeing in the passage is closest in meaning to
afraid of
displaced by
running away from
responding to
Paragraph 6 mentions all of the following as possible causes of the Bantu explosion EXCEPT
superior weapons
better hunting skills
peaceful migration
increased population

In Britain one of the most dramatic changes of the Industrial Revolution was the harnessing of power. Until the reign of George (1760-1820), available sources of power for work and travel had not increased since the Middle Ages. There were three sources of power: animal or human muscles; the wind, operating on sail or windmill; and running water. Only the last of these was suited at all to the continuous operating of machines, and although waterpower abounded in Lancashire and Scotland and ran grain mills as well as textile mills, it had one great disadvantage: streams flowed where nature intended them to, and water-driven factories had to be located on their banks whether or not the location was desirable for other reasons. Furthermore, even the most reliable waterpower varied with the seasons and disappeared in a drought. The new age of machinery, in short, could not have been born without a new source of both movable and constant power.
The source had long been known but not exploited. Early in the eighteenth century, a pump had come into use in which expanding steam raised a piston in a cylinder, and atmospheric pressure brought it down again when the steam condensed inside the cylinder to form a vacuum. This atmospheric engine, invented by Thomas Savery and vastly improved by his partner, Thomas Newcomen, embodied revolutionary principles, but it was so slow and wasteful of fuel that it could not be employed outside the coal mines for which it had been designed. In the 1760s, James Watt perfected a separate condenser for the steam, so that the cylinder did not have to be cooled at every stroke; then he devised a way to make the piston turn a wheel and thus convert reciprocating (back and forth) motion into rotary motion. He thereby transformed an inefficient pump of limited use into a steam engine of a thousand uses. The final step came when steam was introduced into the cylinder to drive the piston backward as well as forward, thereby increasing the speed of the engine and cutting its fuel consumption.
 
 Watt's steam engine soon showed what it could do.  It liberated industry from dependence on running water.
 The engine eliminated water in the mines by driving efficient pumps, which made possible deeper and deeper mining.
 The ready availability of coal inspired William Murdoch during the 1790s to develop the first new form of nighttime illumination to be discovered in a millennium and a half. Coal gas rivaled smoky oil lamps and flickering candles, and early in the new century, well-to-do Londoners grew accustomed to gaslit houses and even streets. Iron manufacturers, 
 which had starved for fuel while depending on charcoal, also benefited from ever-increasing supplies of coal: blast furnaces with steam-powered bellows turned out more iron and 
 steel for the new machinery. Steam became the motive force of the Industrial Revolution as coal and iron ore were the raw materials.

By 1800 more than a thousand steam engines were in use in the British Isles, and Britain retained a virtual monopoly on steam engine production until the 1830s. Steam power did not merely spin cotton and roll iron; early in the new century, it also multiplied ten times over the amount of paper that a single worker could produce in a day. At the same time, operators of the first printing presses run by steam rather than by hand found it possible to produce a thousand pages in an hour rather than thirty. Steam also promised to eliminate a transportation problem not fully solved by either canal boats or turnpikes. Boats could carry heavy weights, but canals could not cross hilly terrain; turnpikes could cross the hills, but the roadbeds could not stand up under great weights. These problems needed still another solution, and the ingredients for it lay close at hand. In some industrial regions, heavily laden wagons, with flanged wheels, were being hauled by horses along metal rails; and the stationary steam engine was puffing in the factory and mine. Another generation passed before inventors succeeded in combining these ingredients, by putting the engine on wheels and the wheels on the rails, so as to provide a machine to take the place of the horse. Thus the railroad age sprang from what had already happened in the eighteenth century.
 
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information
Running water was the best power source for factories since it could keep machines operating continuously, but since it was abundant only in Lancashire and Scotland, most mills and factories that were located elsewhere could not be water driven.
The disadvantage of using waterpower is that streams do not necessarily flow in places that are the most suitable for factories, which explains why so many water-powered grain and textile mills were located in undesirable places.
Since machines could be operated continuously only where running water was abundant, grain and textile mills, as well as other factories, tended to be located only in Lancashire and Scotland.
Running water was the only source of power that was suitable for the continuous operation of machines, but to make use of it, factories had to be located where the water was, regardless of whether such locations made sense otherwise.
Which of the following best describes the relation of paragraph 2 to paragraph 1?
Paragraph 2 shows how the problem discussed in paragraph 1 arose.
Paragraph 2 explains how the problem presented in paragraph 1 came to be solved.
Paragraph 2 provides a more technical discussion of the problem introduced in paragraph 1.
Paragraph 2 shows why the problem discussed in paragraph 1 was especially important to solve.
The word exploited in the passage is closest in meaning to
utilized
recognized
examined
fully understood
The word vastly in the passage is closet in meaning to
quickly
ultimately
greatly
initially
According to paragraph 2, the atmospheric engine was slow because
it had been designed to be used in coal mines
the cylinder had to cool between each stroke
it made use of expanding steam to raise the piston in its cylinder
it could be operated only when a large supply of fuel was available
According to paragraph 2, Watt's steam engine differed from earlier steam engines in each of the following ways EXCEPT:
It used steam to move a piston in a cylinder.
It worked with greater speed.
It was more efficient in its use of fuel.
It could be used in many different ways.
In paragraph 3, the author mentions William Murdochs invention of a new form of nighttime illumination in order to
indicate one of the important developments made possible by the introduction of Watt's steam engine
make the point that Watt's steam engine was not the only invention of importance to the Industrial Revolution
illustrate how important coal was as a raw material for the Industrial Revolution
provide an example of another eighteenth-century invention that used steam as a power source
The phrase grew accustomed to in the passage is closest in meaning to
began to prefer
wanted to have
became used to
insisted on
The word retained in the passage is closest in meaning to
gained
established
profited from
maintained
According to paragraph 4, which of the following statements about steam engines is true?
They were used for the production of paper but not for printing.
By 1800, significant numbers of them were produced outside of Britain.
They were used in factories before they were used to power trains.
They were used in the construction of canals and turnpikes.
According to paragraph 4, providing a machine to take the place of the horse involved combining which two previously separate ingredients?
Turnpikes and canals
Stationary steam engines and wagons with flanged wheels
Metal rails in roadbeds and wagons capable of carrying heavy loads
Canal boats and heavily laden wagons

Successive generations of North Americans have viewed their continents natural environment in different ways. From the vantage point of the present, it is clear that perceptions of the land have changed dramatically from the first years of settlement to the Civil War. Not only have such visions often shifted, but also different peoples have used their particular perspective to reshape the land itself and make it fit their own sense of what nature should be. If the consequences of some changes, such as cutting forests and filling in lowlands, have been deliberate and purposefulto open the landscape and create sweeping vistas, for exampleother human undertakings, such as mining and dam building, have brought results neither anticipated nor intended. Native peoples, no less than the first colonists and subsequent immigrants to North America, have reshaped the natural environment to meet their physical wants and spiritual needs. Indeed, much of the landscape we know today reflects patterns of use and abuse that began several centuries ago.
Long before the first European settlers reached the continents eastern shores, native peoples had developed agricultural practices that had changed the face of the land. By cutting away the bark to kill trees selectively, Indians in the Virginia tidewater (low, coastal land) and much of the Northeast had cleared space to plant small gardens of corn, squash, beans, and melons. Although the first English immigrants described the countryside as almost entirely wooded, the forests provided canopies of large, well-spaced trees under which a horse and rider could pass unhindered. By frequently moving their garden plots to find more-fertile soil and by periodically burning the undergrowth, Indians had further opened the land, in this way facilitating their hunting of deer and other game. Native American visions of the landscape not surprisingly featured people living in harmony with nature, whose riches they celebrated in seasonal rituals and through time-honored practices.
 In contrast, the European colonists who intruded on this harmonious world often viewed it as alien and menacing; some called it, in the language of the Bible, a howling wilderness.  The newcomers to America brought with them agricultural practices and preconceptions about nature based on their experiences in England.  They saw uncultivated lands as wastes that needed to be broken, dressed, and improved. In New England, transplanted English settlers attempted to subdue what they considered a fearsome wilderness by mapping the countryside, draining marshlands, clearing pastures, fencing particular parcels, and planting wheat and other familiar crops.  Within twenty years of the initial Puritan settlement, Edward Johnson boasted of the newcomers achievements: This remote, rocky, barren, bushy, wild-woody wilderness, a receptacle for lions, wolves, bears, foxes, racoons, beavers, otters, and all kind of wild creatures, a place that never afforded the Natives better than the flesh of a few wild creatures and parched Indian corn inched out with chestnuts and bitter acorns, now through the mercy of Christ [has] become a second England for fertility in so short a space, that it is indeed the wonder of the world.
So, rather than adapting to their new land, the English either changed it by cutting trees, building farms, and plowing or searched for soil and landscape features that reminded them of the English countryside. Seeking to tame the land and to conquer their fear of it, generations of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century settlers nevertheless failed to gain the mastery they desired. In part, this failure resulted from their custom of settling along waterways. To expedite travel and facilitate the shipment of agricultural produce, newcomers invariably built their homes along rivers. Despite the colonists attempts to control waterways through dams, rivers never failed to remind them of natures unpredictability and power. Rivers could, and often did, change course abruptly or flood during sudden rainstorms. Not until the middle of the eighteenth century did the colonists begin to discard their negative view of the landscape as a wilderness to be feared and controlled, and to substitute the idea that nature could be as much useful as fearsome.
 
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Some changes to the land have been made to improve the landscape, and others have been made for economic reasons.
While human beings intend to improve land when making changes to it, some of their undertakings have brought disagreeable results.
Of all the changes made by human beings, those made to forests and lowlands have been the most deliberate and purposeful.
While the consequences of some changes to the land have been intentional, others have been unexpected.
The word subsequent in the passage is closest in meaning to
later
original
numerous
occasional
In paragraph 2, why does the author mention that Native Americans frequently moved their garden plots to more fertile soil and periodically burned the undergrowth?
To identify some of the seasonal rituals practiced by Native Americans
To contrast Native American with European agricultural practices
To explain some of the techniques Native Americans used to change the landscape even before the arrival of Europeans
To demonstrate that the hunting of deer and other game played a central role in Native American culture
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 2 about tree density in American forests?
The forests became less dense over time because Europeans cleared paths for riding horses.
Planting gardens was the primary way Native Americans kept forests from becoming too dense to travel through.
The Native American practice of clearing trees by cutting away the bark caused them to grow back more densely than before.
The forests were less dense than they appeared because Native Americans had cleared away selected trees.
According to paragraph 2, all of the following are ways that Native Americans altered the land EXCEPT
holding seasonal rituals
removing trees
burning undergrowth
planting gardens
According to paragraph 3, what was a preconception colonists held about nature based on their experiences in England?
Wild animals needed to be removed from the land before it could be cultivated.
Native crops produced lower yields than did transplanted crops.
Land that had not been cultivated was wasted space.
Uncultivated land could be subdued in approximately 20 years.
The word mastery in the passage is closest in meaning to
status
control
advantage
result
According to paragraph 4, why did the English settle along waterways?
It made agriculture possible without irrigation.
The soil near waterways was usually more fertile.
Shipping and travel were easier over water.
North America had many more waterways than England did.

Living organisms play an essential role in soil formation. The numerous plants and animals living in the soil release minerals from the parent material from which soil is formed, supply organic matter, aid in the translocation (movement) and aeration of the soil, and help protect the soil from erosion. The types of organisms growing or living in the soil greatly influence the soil's physical and chemical characteristics. In fact, for mature soils in many parts of the world, the predominant type of natural vegetation is considered the most important direct influence on soil characteristics. For this reason, a soil scientist can tell a great deal about the attributes of the soil in any given area simply from knowing what kind of flora the soil supports. Thus prairies and tundra regions, which have characteristic vegetations, also have characteristic soils.
The quantity and total weight of soil flora generally exceed that of soil fauna. By far the most numerous and smallest of the plants living in soil are bacteria. Under favorable conditions, a million or more of these tiny, single-celled plants can inhabit each cubic centimeter of soil. It is the bacteria, more than any other organisms, that enable rock or other parent material to undergo the gradual transformation to soil. Some bacteria produce organic acids that directly attack parent material, breaking it down and releasing plant nutrients. Others decompose organic litter (debris) to form humus (nutrient-rich organic matter). A third group of bacteria inhabits the root systems of plants called legumes. These include many important agricultural crops, such as alfalfa, clover, soybeans, peas, and peanuts. The bacteria that legumes host within their root nodules (small swellings on the root) change nitrogen gas from the atmosphere into nitrogen compounds that plants are able to metabolize, a process, known as nitrogen fixation, that makes the soil more fertile. Other microscopic plants also are important in soil development. For example, in highly acidic soils where few bacteria can survive, fungi frequently become the chief decomposers of organic matter.
More complex forms of vegetation play several vital roles with respect to the soil.  Trees, grass, and other large plants supply the bulk of the soil's humus.  The minerals released as these plants decompose on the surface constitute an important nutrient source for succeeding generations of plants as well as for other soil organisms.  In addition, trees can extend their roots deep within the soil and bring up nutrients from far below the surface.  These nutrients eventually enrich the surface soil when the tree drops its leaves or when it dies and decomposes. Finally, trees perform the vital function of slowing water runoff and holding the soil in place with their root systems, thus combating erosion. The increased erosion that often accompanies agricultural use of sloping land is principally caused by the removal of its protective cover of natural vegetation.
Animals also influence soil composition. The faunal counterparts of bacteria are protozoa. These single-celled organisms are the most numerous representatives of the animal kingdom, and, like bacteria, a million or more can sometimes inhabit each cubic centimeter of soil. Protozoa feed on organic matter and hasten its decomposition. Among other soil-dwelling animals, the earthworm is probably the most important. Under exceptionally favorable conditions, up to a million earthworms (with a total body weight exceeding 450 kilograms) may inhabit an acre of soil. Earthworms ingest large quantities of soil, chemically alter it, and excrete it as organic matter called casts. The casts form a high-quality natural fertilizer. In addition, earthworms mix of soil both vertically and horizontally, improving aeration and drainage.
Insects such as ants and termites also can be exceedingly numerous under favorable climatic and soil conditions. In addition, mammals such as moles, field mice, gophers, and prairie dogs sometimes are present in sufficient numbers to have significant impact on the soil. These animals primarily work the soil mechanically. As a result, the soil is aerated broken up, fertilized, and brought to the surface, hastening soil development.
 
The word "attributes" in the passage is closest in meaning to
properties
surrounding
sources
nutrients
According to paragraph 1, which of the following factors is the most important in determining the characteristics of a mature soil?
The kinds of minerals in the parent material.
The extent of erosion in the surrounding area.
The amount of air that circulates through the soil.
The kind of vegetation associated with the soil.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways of leave out essential information.
Legumes make the soil more fertile by hosting bacteria in their root nodules.
Nitrogen fixation makes compounds that plants and bacteria in legumes can metabolize.
Bacteria living in the roots of legumes makes the soil more fertile by producing nitrogen compounds that plants can metabolize.
The root nodules of legumes contain bacteria, nitrogen gas from the atmosphere, and nitrogen compounds that plants can metabolize.
According to paragraph 2, which of the following statements about soil creation is true?
Soil creation requires that there be more plants than animals in any given location.
Soil is created from the organic debris left over when bacteria decompose.
Soil creation occurs when a cubic centimeter of existing soil contains abundant organic material.
Soil is created as a results of bacteria breaking down rocks and organic material.
In paragraph 2, why does the author mention the activity of fungi in acidic soils?
To demonstrate that fungi are capable of nitrogen fixation under certain conditions.
To supports the claim that microscopic plants besides bacteria contribute to soil development.
To show that fungi play a different role from bacteria in decomposing organic matter.
To account for the survival rate of microscopic plants in highly acidic soils.
The word "bulk" in the passage is closet in meaning to
composition
largest part
richest part
quality
According to paragraph 3, how do trees benefit other plants?
Trees make deep-lying nutrients available to plants whose roots do not extend very far into the soil.
When trees decompose, they release nutrients minerals deep into the soil.
Humus from trees provides nutrients for plants with roots that extend deep within the soil.
When trees die and decompose, they make available a large space for generations of other plants to grow.
Paragraph 3 supports which of the following inferences about the effect of vegetation on soil?
The root systems of most crops are unable to prevent erosion on sloping ground.
Without a cover of vegetation, fast running water is likely to disappear from the ground surface before it can erode much of the soil.
The roots of trees and other large plants remove much water from the ground, making the soil dry and likely to be eroded by the wind.
Areas that naturally have little vegetation, such as deserts, are more easily eroded than is agricultural land that has been cleared of its natural vegetation.
The word "hasten" in the passage is closet
aid
begin
accelerate
ensure
According to paragraph 4, earthworms do all the following to help soils develop EXCEPT
eat waste matter
mix the soil in different directions
change the chemistry of the soil
create a natural fertilizer
The word "exceedingly" in the passage is closest in meaning to
surprisingly
relatively
reliably
extremely
According to paragraph 5, in which of the following ways do some mammals help soils develop?
They prevent insects from feeding on nutrients that enrich the soil.
They break up the soil as they move through it.
They remove waste matter that would otherwise contaminate the soil.
They ensure that fertilizer remains in the soil.

In 1769 in a little town in Oxfordshire, England, a child with the very ordinary name of William Smith was born into the poor family of a village blacksmith. He received rudimentary village schooling, but mostly he roamed his uncle's farm collecting the fossils that were so abundant in the rocks of the Cotswold hills. When he grew older, William Smith taught himself surveying from books he bought with his small savings, and at the age of eighteen he was apprenticed to a surveyor of the local parish. He then proceeded to teach himself geology, and when he was twenty-four, he went to work for the company that was excavating the Somerset Coal Canal in the south of England.
This was before the steam locomotive, and canal building was at its height. The companies building the canals to transport coal needed surveyors to help them find the coal deposits worth mining as well as to determine the best courses for the canals. This job gave Smith an opportunity to study the fresh rock outcrops created by the newly dug canal. He later worked on similar jobs across the length and breadth of England, all the while studying the newly revealed strata and collecting all the fossils he could find. Smith used mail coaches to travel as much as 10,000 miles per year. In 1815 he published the first modern geological map, A Map of the Strata of England and Wales with a Part of Scotland, a map so meticulously researched that it can still be used today.
In 1831 when Smith was finally recognized by the Geological Society of London as the father of English geology, it was not only for his maps but also for something even more important. Ever since people had begun to catalog the strata in particular outcrops, there had been the hope that these could somehow be used to calculate geological time. But as more and more accumulations of strata were cataloged in more and more places, it became clear that the sequences of rocks sometimes differed from region to region and that no rock type was ever going to become a reliable time marker throughout the world. Even without the problem of regional differences, rocks present a difficulty as unique time markers. Quartz is quartza silicon ion surrounded by four oxygen ionstheres no difference at all between two-million-year-old Pleistocene quartz and Cambrian quartz created over 500 million years ago.
As he collected fossils from strata throughout England, Smith began to see that the fossils told a different story from the rocks. Particularly in the younger strata, the rocks were often so similar that he had trouble distinguishing the strata, but he never had trouble telling the fossils apart. While rock between two consistent strata might in one place be shale and in another sandstone, the fossils in that shale or sandstone were always the same. Some fossils endured through so many millions of years that they appear in many strata, but others occur only in a few strata, and a few species had their births and extinctions within one particular stratum. Fossils are thus identifying markers for particular periods in Earth's history.
 
Not only could Smith identify rock strata by the fossils they contained, he could also see a pattern emerging: certain fossils always appear in more ancient sediments,
 while others begin to be seen as the strata become more recent.  By following the fossils, Smith was able to put all the strata of England's earth into relative temporal sequence.
  About the same time, Georges Cuvier made the same discovery while studying the rocks around Paris. Soon it was realized that this principle of faunal (animal) succession was
 valid not only in England or France but virtually everywhere.  It was actually a principle of floral succession as well, because plants showed the same transformation through time as did fauna. Limestone may be found in the Cambrian or300 million years laterin the Jurassic strata, but a trilobitethe ubiquitous marine arthropod that had its birth in the Cambrianwill never be found in Jurassic strata, nor a dinosaur in the Cambrian.

 
The word rudimentary in the passage is closest in meaning to
thorough
strict
basic
occasional
According to paragraph 1, which of the following statements about William Smith is NOT true?
Smith learned surveying by reading and by apprenticing for a local surveyor.
Smiths family lived in a small English town and possessed little wealth.
Smith learned about fossils from books he borrowed from his uncle.
Smith eventually left his village to work on the excavation of an English canal.
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 2 about canal building?
Canals were built primarily in the south of England rather than in other regions.
Canal building decreased after the steam locomotive was invented.
Canal building made it difficult to study rock strata which often became damaged in the process.
Canal builders hired surveyors like Smith to examine exposed rock strata.
According to paragraph2, which of the following is true of the map published by William Smith?
It indicates the locations of England's major canals.
It became most valuable when the steam locomotive made rail travel possible.
The data for the map were collected during Smiths work on canals.
It is no longer regarded as a geological masterpiece.
The word meticulously in the passage is closest in meaning to
carefully
quickly
frequently
obviously
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
The discovery of regional differences in the sequences of rocks led geologists to believe that rock types could someday become reliable time markers.
Careful analysis of strata revealed that rocks cannot establish geological time because the pattern of rock layers varies from place to place.
Smith's catalogs of rock strata indicated that the sequences of rocks are different from place to place and from region to region.
Because people did not catalog regional differences in sequences of rocks, it was believed that rocks could never be reliable time markers.
Why does the author use the phrase Quartz is quartz?
To describe how the differences between Pleistocene and Cambrian quartz reveal information about dating rocks
To point out that the chemical composition of quartz makes it more difficult to date than other rocks
To provide an example of how regional differences in rock sequences can make a particular rock difficult to date
To explain that rocks are difficult to use for dating because their chemical compositions always remain the same over time
According to paragraph 4, it was difficult for Smith to distinguish rock strata because
the rocks from different strata closely resembled each other
he was often unable to find fossils in the younger rock strata
their similarity to each other made it difficult for him to distinguish one rock type from another
the type of rock between two consistent strata was always the same
The word endured in the passage is closest in meaning to
vanished
developed
varied
survived
The word virtually in the passage is closest in meaning to
possibly
absolutely
surprisingly
nearly
Select the TWO answer choices that are true statements based upon the discussion of the principle of faunal succession in paragraph 5. To receive credit, you must select TWO answers.
It was a principle that applied to fauna but not to flora.
It was discovered independently by two different geologists.
It describes how fossils are distributed in rock strata.
It explains why plants and animals undergo transformations through time.
In mentioning "trilobite, the author is making which of the following points?
Fossils cannot be found in more than one rock stratum.
Faunal succession can help put rock layers in relative temporal sequence.
Faunal succession cannot be applied to different strata composed of the same kind of rock.
The presence of trilobite fossils makes it difficult to date a rock.

What do you remember about your life before you were three?  Few people can remember anything that happened to them in their early years.  Adults' memories of the next few years also tend to be scanty.  Most people remember only a few eventsusually ones that were meaningful and distinctive, such as being hospitalized or a siblings birth.  
How might this inability to recall early experiences be explained? The sheer passage of time does not account for it; adults have excellent recognition of pictures of people who attended high school with them 35 years earlier. Another seemingly plausible explanationthat infants do not form enduring memories at this point in developmentalso is incorrect. Children two and a half to three years old remember experiences that occurred in their first year, and eleven month olds remember some events a year later. Nor does the hypothesis that infantile amnesia reflects repressionor holding backof sexually charged episodes explain the phenomenon. While such repression may occur, people cannot remember ordinary events from the infant and toddler periods either.
Three other explanations seem more promising. One involves physiological changes relevant to memory. Maturation of the frontal lobes of the brain continues throughout early childhood, and this part of the brain may be critical for remembering particular episodes in ways that can be retrieved later. Demonstrations of infants and toddlers' long-term memory have involved their repeating motor activities that they had seen or done earlier, such as reaching in the dark for objects, putting a bottle in a dolls mouth, or pulling apart two pieces of a toy. The brains level of physiological maturation may support these types of memories, but not ones requiring explicit verbal descriptions.
A second explanation involves the influence of the social world on childrens language use. Hearing and telling stories about events may help children store information in ways that will endure into later childhood and adulthood. Through hearing stories with a clear beginning, middle, and ending children may learn to extract the gist of events in ways that they will be able to describe many years later. Consistent with this view, parents and children increasingly engage in discussions of past events when children are about three years old. However, hearing such stories is not sufficient for younger children to form enduring memories. Telling such stories to two year olds does not seem to produce long-lasting verbalizable memories.
A third likely explanation for infantile amnesia involves incompatibilities between the ways in which infants encode information and the ways in which older children and adults retrieve it. Whether people can remember an event depends critically on the fit between the way in which they earlier encoded the information and the way in which they later attempt to retrieve it. The better able the person is to reconstruct the perspective from which the material was encoded, the more likely that recall will be successful.
This view is supported by a variety of factors that can create mismatches between very young children's encoding and older children's and adults' retrieval efforts. The world looks very different to a person whose head is only two or three feet above the ground than to one whose head is five or six feet above it. Older children and adults often try to retrieve the names of things they saw, but infants would not have encoded the information verbally. General knowledge of categories of events such as a birthday party or a visit to the doctor's office helps older individuals encode their experiences, but again, infants and toddlers are unlikely to encode many experiences within such knowledge structures.
These three explanations of infantile amnesia are not mutually exclusive; indeed, they support each other. Physiological immaturity may be part of why infants and toddlers do not form extremely enduring memories, even when they hear stories that promote such remembering in preschoolers. Hearing the stories may lead preschoolers to encode aspects of events that allow them to form memories they can access as adults. Conversely, improved encoding of what they hear may help them better understand and remember stories and thus make the stories more useful for remembering future events. Thus, all three explanationsphysiological maturation, hearing and producing stories about past events, and improved encoding of key aspects of eventsseem likely to be involved in overcoming infantile amnesia.
 
What purpose does paragraph 2 serve in the larger discussion of childrens inability to recall early experiences?
To argue that theories that are not substantiated by evidence should generally be considered unreliable
To argue that the hypotheses mentioned in paragraph 2 have been more thoroughly researched than have the theories mentioned later in the passage
To explain why some theories about infantile amnesia are wrong before presenting ones more likely to be true
To explain why infantile amnesia is of great interest to researchers
The word plausible in the passage is closest in meaning to
flexible
believable
debatable
predictable
The word phenomenon in the passage is closest in meaning to
exception
repetition
occurrence
idea
All of the following theories about the inability to recall early experiences are rejected in paragraph 2 EXCEPT:
The ability to recall an event decreases as the time after the event increases.
Young children are not capable of forming memories that last for more than a short time.
People may hold back sexually meaningful memories.
Most events in childhood are too ordinary to be worth remembering.
What does paragraph 3 suggest about long-term memory in children?
Maturation of the frontal lobes of the brain is important for the long-term memory of motor activities but not verbal descriptions.
Young children may form long-term memories of actions they see earlier than of things they hear or are told.
Young children have better long-term recall of short verbal exchanges than of long ones.
Childrens long-term recall of motor activities increases when such activities are accompanied by explicit verbal descriptions.
According to paragraph 4, what role may storytelling play in forming childhood memories?
It may encourage the physiological maturing of the brain.
It may help preschool children tell the difference between ordinary and unusual memories.
It may help preschool children retrieve memories quickly.
It may provide an ordered structure that facilitates memory retrieval.
The word critically in the passage is closest in meaning to
fundamentally
partially
consistently
subsequently
The word perspective in the passage is closest in meaning to
system
theory
source
viewpoint
The phrase This view in the passage refers to the belief that
the ability to retrieve a memory partly depends on the similarity between the encoding and retrieving process
the process of encoding information is less complex for adults than it is for young adults and infants
infants and older children are equally dependent on discussion of past events for the retrieval of information
infants encode information in the same way older children and adults do
According to paragraphs 5 and 6, one disadvantage very young children face in processing information is that they cannot
process a lot of information at one time
organize experiences according to type
block out interruptions
interpret the tone of adult language
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Incomplete physiological development may partly explain why hearing stories does not improve long-term memory in infants and toddlers.
One reason why preschoolers fail to comprehend the stories they hear is that they are physiologically immature.
Given the chance to hear stories, infants and toddlers may form enduring memories despite physiological immaturity.
Physiologically mature children seem to have no difficulty remembering stories they heard as preschoolers.
How does paragraph 7 relate to the earlier discussion of infantile amnesia?
It introduces a new theory about the causes of infantile amnesia.
It argues that particular theories discussed earlier in the passage require further research.
It explains how particular theories discussed earlier in the passage may work in combination.
It evaluates which of the theories discussed earlier is most likely to be true.

Research has shown that certain minerals are required by plants for normal growth and development. The soil is the source of these minerals, which are absorbed by the plant with the water from the soil. Even nitrogen, which is a gas in its elemental state, is normally absorbed from the soil as nitrate ions. Some soils are notoriously deficient in micro nutrients and are therefore unable to support most plant life. So-called serpentine soils, for example, are deficient in calcium, and only plants able to tolerate low levels of this mineral can survive. In modern agriculture, mineral depletion of soils is a major concern, since harvesting crops interrupts the recycling of nutrients back to the soil.
Mineral deficiencies can often be detected by specific symptoms such as chlorosis (loss of chlorophyll resulting in yellow or white leaf tissue), necrosis (isolated dead patches), anthocyanin formation (development of deep red pigmentation of leaves or stem), stunted growth, and development of woody tissue in an herbaceous plant. Soils are most commonly deficient in nitrogen and phosphorus. Nitrogen-deficient plants exhibit many of the symptoms just described. Leaves develop chlorosis; stems are short and slender, and anthocyanin discoloration occurs on stems, petioles, and lower leaf surfaces. Phosphorus-deficient plants are often stunted, with leaves turning a characteristic dark green, often with the accumulation of anthocyanin. Typically, older leaves are affected first as the phosphorus is mobilized to young growing tissue. Iron deficiency is characterized by chlorosis between veins in young leaves.
Much of the research on nutrient deficiencies is based on growing plants hydroponically, that is, in soilless liquid nutrient solutions. This technique allows researchers to create solutions that selectively omit certain nutrients and then observe the resulting effects on the plants. Hydroponics has applications beyond basic research, since it facilitates the growing of greenhouse vegetables during winter. Aeroponics, a technique in which plants are suspended and the roots misted with a nutrient solution, is another method for growing plants without soil.
While mineral deficiencies can limit the growth of plants, an overabundance of certain minerals can be toxic and can also limit growth. Saline soils, which have high concentrations of sodium chloride and other salts, limit plant growth, and research continues to focus on developing salt-tolerant varieties of agricultural crops. Research has focused on the toxic effects of heavy metals such as lead, cadmium, mercury, and aluminum; however, even copper and zinc, which are essential elements, can become toxic in high concentrations. Although most plants cannot survive in these soils, certain plants have the ability to tolerate high levels of these minerals.
Scientists have known for some time that certain plants, called hyperaccumulators, can concentrate minerals at levels a hundredfold or greater than normal.  A survey of known hyperaccumulators identified that 75 percent of them amassed nickel, cobalt, copper, zinc, manganese, lead, and cadmium are other minerals of choice.  Hyperaccumulators run the entire range of the plant world.  They may be herbs, shrubs, or trees.  Many members of the mustard family, spurge family, legume family, and grass family are top hyperaccumulators. Many are found in tropical and subtropical areas of the world, where accumulation of high concentrations of metals may afford some protection against plant-eating insects and microbial pathogens.
Only recently have investigators considered using these plants to clean up soil and waste sites that have been contaminated by toxic levels of heavy metalsan environmentally friendly approach known as phytoremediation. This scenario begins with the planting of hyperaccumulating species in the target area, such as an abandoned mine or an irrigation pond contaminated by runoff. Toxic minerals would first be absorbed by roots but later relocated to the stem and leaves. A harvest of the shoots would remove the toxic compounds off site to be burned or composted to recover the metal for industrial uses. After several years of cultivation and harvest, the site would be restored at a cost much lower than the price of excavation and reburial, the standard practice for remediation of contaminated soils. For examples, in field trials, the plant alpine pennycress removed zinc and cadmium from soils near a zinc smelter, and Indian mustard, native to Pakistan and India, has been effective in reducing levels of selenium salts by 50 percent in contaminated soils.
 
According to paragraph 1, what is true of plants that can grow in serpentine soil?
They absorb micronutrients unusually well.
They require far less calcium than most plants do.
They are able to absorb nitrogen in its elemental state.
They are typically crops raised for food.
The word exhibit in the passage is closest in meaning to
fight off
show
cause
spread
According to paragraph 2, which of the following symptoms occurs in phosphorus-deficient plants but not in plants deficient in nitrogen or iron?
Chlorosis on leaves
Change in leaf pigmentation to a dark shade of green
Short, stunted appearance of stems
Reddish pigmentation on the leaves or stem
According to paragraph 2, a symptom of iron deficiency is the presence in young leaves of
deep red discoloration between the veins
white or yellow tissue between the veins
dead spots between the veins
characteristic dark green veins
The word facilitates in the passage is closest in meaning to
slows down
affects
makes easier
focuses on
According to paragraph 3, what is the advantage of hydroponics for research on nutrient deficiencies in plants?
It allows researchers to control what nutrients a plant receives.
It allows researchers to observe the growth of a large number of plants simultaneously.
It is possible to directly observe the roots of plants.
It is unnecessary to keep misting plants with nutrient solutions.
The word suspended in the passage is closest in meaning to
grown
protected
spread out
hung
Why does the author mention herbs, shrubs, and trees?
To provide examples of plant types that cannot tolerate high levels of harmful minerals.
To show why so many plants are hyperaccumulators.
To help explain why hyperaccumulators can be found in so many different places.
To emphasize that hyperaccumulators occur in a wide range of plant types.
The word afford in the passage is closest in meaning to
offer
prevent
increase
remove
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Before considering phytoremediation, hyperaccumulating species of plants local to the target area must be identified.
The investigation begins with an evaluation of toxic sites in the target area to determine the extent of contamination.
The first step in phytoremediation is the planting of hyperaccumulating plants in the area to be cleaned up.
Mines and irrigation ponds can be kept from becoming contaminated by planting hyperaccumulating species in targeted areas.
It can be inferred from paragraph 6 that compared with standard practices for remediation of contaminated soils, phytoremediation
does not allow for the use of the removed minerals for industrial purposes
can be faster to implement
is equally friendly to the environment
is less suitable for soils that need to be used within a short period of time
Why does the author mention Indian mustard?
To warn about possible risks involved in phytoremediation
To help illustrate the potential of phytoremediation
To show that hyperaccumulating plants grow in many regions of the world
To explain how zinc contamination can be reduced

The greater Pacific region, traditionally called Oceania, consists of three cultural areas: Melanesia, Micronesia, and Polynesia. Melanesia, in the southwest Pacific, contains the large islands of New Guinea, the Solomons, Vanuatu, and New Caledonia. Micronesia, the area north of Melanesia, consists primarily of small scattered islands. Polynesia is the central Pacific area in the great triangle defined by Hawaii, Easter Island, and New Zealand. Before the arrival of Europeans, the islands in the two largest cultural areas, Polynesia and Micronesia, together contained a population estimated at 700,000.
 
Speculation on the origin of these Pacific islanders began as soon as outsiders encountered them, in the absence of solid linguistic, archaeological, and biological data,
many fanciful and mutually exclusive theories were devised. Pacific islanders are variously thought to have come from North America, South America, Egypt, Israel,
and India, as well as Southeast Asia.  Many older theories implicitly deprecated the navigational abilities and overall cultural creativity of the Pacific islanders.
 For example, British anthropologists G. Elliot Smith and W. J. Perry assumed that only Egyptians would have been skilled enough to navigate and colonize the Pacific.  They inferred that the Egyptians even crossed the Pacific to found the great civilizations of the New World (North and South America). 
 In 1947 Norwegian adventurer Thor Heyerdahl drifted on a balsa-log raft westward with the winds and currents across the Pacific from South America to prove his theory that 
Pacific islanders were Native Americans (also called American Indians). Later Heyerdahl suggested that the Pacific was peopled by three migrations:
by Native Americans from the Pacific Northwest of North America drifting to Hawaii, by Peruvians drifting to Easter Island, and by Melanesians. 
In 1969 he crossed the Atlantic in an Egyptian-style reed boat to prove Egyptian influences in the Americas. Contrary to these theorists, 
the overwhelming evidence of physical anthropology, linguistics, and archaeology shows that the Pacific islanders came from Southeast 
Asia and were skilled enough as navigators to sail against the prevailing winds and currents.

The basic cultural requirements for the successful colonization of the Pacific islands include the appropriate boat-building, sailing, and navigation skills to get to the islands in the first place, domesticated plants and gardening skills suited to often marginal conditions, and a varied inventory of fishing implements and techniques. It is now generally believed that these prerequisites originated with peoples speaking Austronesian languages (a group of several hundred related languages) and began to emerge in Southeast Asia by about 5000 B.C.E. The culture of that time, based on archaeology and linguistic reconstruction, is assumed to have had a broad inventory of cultivated plants including taro, yarns, banana, sugarcane, breadfruit, coconut, sago, and rice. Just as important, the culture also possessed the basic foundation for an effective maritime adaptation, including outrigger canoes and a variety of fishing techniques that could be effective for overseas voyaging.
Contrary to the arguments of some that much of the pacific was settled by Polynesians accidentally marooned after being lost and adrift, it seems reasonable that this feat was accomplished by deliberate colonization expeditions that set out fully stocked with food and domesticated plants and animals. Detailed studies of the winds and currents using computer simulations suggest that drifting canoes would have been a most unlikely means of colonizing the Pacific. These expeditions were likely driven by population growth and political dynamics on the home islands, as well as the challenge and excitement of exploring unknown waters. Because all Polynesians, Micronesians, and many Melanesians speak Austronesian languages and grow crops derived from Southeast Asia, all these peoples most certainly derived from that region and not the New World or elsewhere. The undisputed pre-Columbian presence in Oceania of the sweet potato, which is a New World domesticate, has sometimes been used to support Heyerdahls American Indians in the Pacific theories. However, this is one plant out of a long list of Southeast Asian domesticates. As Patrick Kirch, an American anthropologist, points out, rather than being brought by rafting South Americans, sweet potatoes might just have easily been brought back by returning Polynesian navigators who could have reached the west coast of South America.
 
According to paragraph 1, all of the following are true statements about Melanesia, Micronesia, and Polynesia EXCEPT:
Collectively, these regions are traditionally known as Oceania.
These islands of Micronesia are small and spread out.
Hawaii, Easter Island, and New Zealand mark the boundaries of Polynesia.
Melanesia is situated to the north of Micronesia.
By stating that the theories are mutually exclusive the author means that
if one of the theories is true, then all the others must be false
the differences between the theories are unimportant
taken together, the theories cover all possibilities
the theories support each other
The word overwhelming in the passage is closest in meaning to
powerful
favorable
current
reasonable
According to paragraph 2, which of the following led some early researchers to believe that the Pacific islanders originally came from Egypt?
Egyptians were known to have founded other great civilizations.
Sailors from other parts of the world were believed to lack the skills needed to travel across the ocean.
Linguistic, archaeological, and biological data connected the islands to Egypt.
Egyptian accounts claimed responsibility for colonizing the Pacific as well as the Americas.
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 2 about early theories of where the first inhabitants of the Pacific islands came from?
They were generally based on solid evidence.
They tried to account for the origin of the characteristic features of the languages spoken by Pacific islanders.
They assumed that the peoples living in Southeast Asia did not have the skills needed to sail to the Pacific islands.
They questioned the ideas of Elliot Smith and W. J. Perry.
The word implements in the passage is closest in meaning to
skills
tools
opportunities
practices
All of the following are mentioned in paragraph 3 as required for successful colonization of the Pacific islands EXCEPT
knowledge of various Austronesian languages
a variety of fishing techniques
navigational skills
knowledge of plant cultivation
In paragraph 3, why does the author provide information about the types of crops grown and boats used in Southeast Asia during the period around 5000 B.C.E.?
To evaluate the relative importance of agriculture and fishing to early Austronesian peoples
To illustrate the effectiveness of archaeological and linguistic methods in discovering details about life in ancient times
To contrast living conditions on the continent of Asia with living conditions on the Pacific islands
To demonstrate that people from this region had the skills and resources necessary to travel to and survive on the Pacific islands
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Some people have argued that the Pacific was settled by traders who became lost while transporting domesticated plants and animals.
The original Polynesian settlers were probably marooned on the islands, but they may have been joined later by carefully prepared colonization expeditions.
Although it seems reasonable to believe that colonization expeditions would set out fully stocked, this is contradicted by much of the evidence.
The settlement of the Pacific islands was probably intentional and well planned rather than accidental as some people have proposed.
The word undisputed in the passage is closest in meaning to
mysterious
unexpected
acknowledged
significant
According to paragraph 4, which of the following is NOT an explanation for why a group of people might have wanted to colonize the Pacific islands?
As their numbers increased, they needed additional territory.
The winds and currents made the islands easy to reach.
The political situation at home made emigration desirable.
They found exploration challenging and exciting.
Why does the author mention the views of Patrick Kirch"
To present evidence in favor of Heyerdahls idea about American Indians reaching Oceania
To emphasize the familiarity of Pacific islanders with crops from many different regions of the world
To indicate that supposed proof for Heyerdahls theory has an alternative explanation
To demonstrate that some of the same crops were cultivated in both South America and Oceania

The geologic timescale is marked by significant geologic and biological events, including the origin of Earth about 4.6 billion years ago, the origin of life about 3.5 billion years ago, the origin of eukaryotic life-forms (living things that have cells with true nuclei) about 1.5 billion years ago, and the origin of animals about 0.6 billion years ago. The last event marks the beginning of the Cambrian period. Animals originated relatively late in the history of Earthin only the last 10 percent of Earths history. During a geologically brief 100-million-year period, all modern animal groups (along with other animals that are now extinct) evolved. This rapid origin and diversification of animals is often referred to as the Cambrian explosion.
Scientists have asked important questions about this explosion for more than a century. Why did it occur so late in the history of Earth? The origin of multicellular forms of life seems a relatively simple step compared to the origin of life itself. Why does the fossil record not document the series of evolutionary changes during the evolution of animals? Why did animal life evolve so quickly? Paleontologists continue to search the fossil record for answers to these questions.
 
One interpretation regarding the absence of fossils during this important 100-million-year period is that early animals were soft bodied and simply did not fossilize.
 Fossilization of soft-bodied animals is less likely than fossilization of hard-bodied animals, but it does occur. 
Conditions that promote fossilization of soft-bodied animals include very rapid covering by sediments that create an environment that discourages decomposition.  In fact, fossil beds containing soft-bodied animals have been known for many years.  

The Ediacara fossil formation, which contains the oldest known animal fossils, consists exclusively of soft-bodied forms. Although named after a site in Australia, the Ediacara formation is worldwide in distribution and dates to Precambrian times. This 700-million-year-old formation gives few clues to the origins of modern animals, however, because paleontologists believe it represents an evolutionary experiment that failed. It contains no ancestors of modern animal groups.
A slightly younger fossil formation containing animal remains is the Tommotian formation, named after a locale in Russia. It dates to the very early Cambrian period, and it also contains only soft-bodied forms. At one time, the animals present in these fossil beds were assigned to various modern animal groups, but most paleontologists now agree that all Tommotian fossils represent unique body forms that arose in the early Cambrian period and disappeared before the end of the period, leaving no descendants in modern animal groups.
A third fossil formation containing both soft-bodied and hard-bodied animals provides evidence of the result of the Cambrian explosion. This fossil formation, called the Burgess Shale, is in Yoho National Park in the Canadian Rocky Mountains of British Columbia. Shortly after the Cambrian explosion, mud slides rapidly buried thousands of marine animals under conditions that favored fossilization. These fossil beds provide evidence of about 32 modern animal groups, plus about 20 other animal body forms that are so different from any modern animals that they cannot be assigned to any one of the modern groups. These unassignable animals include a large swimming predator called Anomalocaris and a soft-bodied animal called Wiwaxia, which ate detritus or algae. The Burgess Shale formation also has fossils of many extinct representatives of modern animal groups. For example, a well-known Burgess Shale animal called Sidneyia is a representative of a previously unknown group of arthropods (a category of animals that includes insects, spiders, mites, and crabs).
Fossil formations like the Burgess Shale show that evolution cannot always be thought of as a slow progression. The Cambrian explosion involved rapid evolutionary diversification, followed by the extinction of many unique animals. Why was this evolution so rapid? No one really knows. Many zoologists believe that it was because so many ecological niches were available with virtually no competition from existing species. Will zoologists ever know the evolutionary sequences in the Cambrian explosion? Perhaps another ancient fossil bed of soft-bodied animals from 600-million-year-old seas is awaiting discovery.
 
The word significant in the passage is closest in meaning to
numerous
important
unexplained
sudden
The word relatively in the passage is closest in meaning to
surprisingly
collectively
comparatively
characteristically
The word diversification in the passage is closest in meaning to
emergence of many varieties
steady decline in number
gradual increase in body size
sudden disappearance
The period discussed in the passage is referred to as an explosion because it
occurred 0.6 billion years ago, late in Earths history
was characterized by the unusually fast evolution of many new life-forms
was characterized by widespread animal extinction
was characterized by violent volcanic eruptions
According to Paragraph2, which of the following is NOT a question that paleontologists asked about the Cambrian explosion?
Why was the origin of life a simple step in Earths history?
Why did it take so long for multicellular organisms to develop?
Why did animal life evolve so rapidly?
Why does the fossil record lack evidence of animal evolution during that time?
Which of the following best describes the relationship between paragraph 2 and paragraph 3?
Paragraph 2 puts forward several scientific claims, one of which is rejected in paragraph 3.
Paragraph 2 poses several questions, and paragraph 3 offers a possible answer to one of them.
Paragraph 2 presents outdated traditional views, while paragraph 3 presents the current scientific conclusions.
Paragraph 2 introduces a generalization that is illustrated by specific examples in paragraph 3.
The word promote in the passage is closest in meaning to
complicate
prevent
encourage
affect
Which of the following is NOT mentioned in paragraph 4 as being true of the Ediacara formation?
It contains fossils that date back to the Precambrian period.
It contains only soft-bodied animal fossils.
It is located on a single site in Australia.
It does not contain any fossils of the ancestors of modern animals.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
The animals found in the Tommotian fossil bed were once thought to belong to a variety of modern animal groups, but now they are thought to have descended from a single group.
Animals in the Tommotian fossil beds were initially assigned to modern animal groups but are now thought to belong to groups that emerged and died out during the Cambrian period.
Though at first they thought otherwise, paleontologists now agree that the animals in the Tommotian have body forms from which modern animals have descended.
It is unclear whether the Tommotian fossils from the early Cambrian period represent unique body forms or whether they should be assigned to various modern animal groups.
Why does the author mention Anomalocaris and Wiwaxia?
To contrast predators with animals that eat plants such as algae
To question the effects of rapid mud slides on fossilization
To suggest that much is still unknown about animals found in the Burgess Shale
To provide examples of fossils that cannot be assigned to a modern animal group
Sidneyia is an example of
a relative of Anomalocaris and Wiwaxia
a previously unknown Burgess Shale animal
an extinct member of a currently existing category of animals
an animal that cannot be assigned to any modern animal group
What can be inferred from paragraph 7 about why the Cambrian explosion is so unusual?
It generated new ecological niches through the extinction of many unique animals.
It was a period of rapid evolution, and evolution is often thought of as a slow process.
It is a period whose evolutionary sequences are clearly marked.
It generated a very large number of ancient fossil beds containing soft-bodied animals.

Two species of deer have been prevalent in the Puget Sound area of Washington State in the Pacific Northwest of the United States. The black-tailed deer, a lowland, west-side cousin of the mule deer of eastern Washington, is now the most common. The other species, the Columbian white-tailed deer, in earlier times was common in the open prairie country; it is now restricted to the low, marshy islands and flood plains along the lower Columbia River.
 
Nearly any kind of plant of the forest understory can be part of a deer's diet. Where the forest inhibits the growth of grass and other meadow plants,
 the black-tailed deer browses on huckleberry, salal, dogwood, and almost any other shrub or herb. But this is fair-weather feeding. What keeps the black-tailed deer alive in the harsher seasons of plant decay and dormancy? One compensation for not hibernating is the built-in urge to migrate.
" > Deer may move from high-elevation browse areas in summer down to the lowland areas in late fall.  Even with snow on the ground, the high bushy understory is exposed; 
 also snow and wind bring down leafy branches of cedar, hemlock, red alder, and other arboreal fodder.


 The numbers of deer have fluctuated markedly since the entry of Europeans into Puget Sound country. The early explorers and settlers told of abundant deer in the early 1800s and yet almost in the same breath bemoaned the lack of this succulent game animal.
Famous explorers of the north American frontier, Lewis and Clark arrived at the mouth of the Columbia River on November 14, 1805, in nearly starved circumstances. They had experienced great difficulty finding game west of the Rockies and not until the second of December did they kill their first elk. To keep 40 people alive that winter,
they consumed approximately 150 elk and 20 deer. And when game moved out of the lowlands in early spring, the expedition decided to return east rather than face possible starvation. Later on in the early years of the nineteenth century, when Fort Vancouver became the headquarters of the Hudson's Bay Company, deer populations continued to fluctuate. David Douglas,Scottish botanical explorer of the 1830s, found a disturbing change in the animal life around the fort during the period between his first visit in 1825 and his final contact with the fort in 1832. A recent Douglas biographer states:" The deer which once picturesquely dotted the meadows around the fort were gone [in 1832], hunted to extermination in order to protect the crops.

Reduction in numbers of game should have boded ill for their survival in later times. A worsening of the plight of deer was to be expected as settlers encroached on the land, logging, burning, and clearing, eventually replacing a wilderness landscape with roads, cities, towns, and factories. No doubt the numbers of deer declined still further. Recall the fate of the Columbian white-tailed deer, now in a protected status. But for the black-tailed deer, human pressure has had just the opposite effect. Wildlife zoologist Helmut Buechner(1953), in reviewing the nature of biotic changes in Washington through recorded time, says that "since the early 1940s, the state has had more deer than at any other time in its history, the winter population fluctuating around approximately 320,000 deer (mule and black-tailed deer), which will yield about 65,000 of either sex and any age annually for an indefinite period."
The causes of this population rebound are consequences of other human actions. First, the major predators of deerwolves, cougar, and lynxhave been greatly reduced in numbers. Second, conservation has been insured by limiting times for and types of hunting. But the most profound reason for the restoration of high population numbers has been the fate of the forests. Great tracts of lowland country deforested by logging, fire, or both have become ideal feeding grounds of deer. In addition to finding an increase of suitable browse, like huckleberry and vine maple, Arthur Einarsen, longtime game biologist in the Pacific Northwest, found quality of browse in the open areas to be substantially more nutritive. The protein content of shade-grown vegetation, for example, was much lower than that for plants grown in clearings.
 
According to paragraph 1, which of the following is true of the white-tailed deer of Puget Sound?
It is native to lowlands and marshes.
It is more closely related to the mule deer of eastern Washington than to other types of deer.
It has replaced the black-tailed deer in the open prairie.
It no longer lives in a particular type of habitat that it once occupied.
It can be inferred from the discussion in paragraph 2 that winter conditions
cause some deer to hibernate
make food unavailable in the highlands for deer
make it easier for deer to locate understory plants
prevent deer from migrating during the winter
The word "inhibits" in the passage is closest in meaning to
consists of
combines
restricts
establishes
The phrase "in the same breath" in the passage is closest in meaning to
impatiently
humorously
continuously
immediately
The author tells the story of the explorers Lewis and Clark in paragraph 3 in order to illustrate which of the following points?
The number of deer within the Puget Sound region has varied over time.
Most of the explorers who came to the Puget Sound area were primarily interested in hunting game.
There was more game for hunting in the East of the United States than in the West.
Individual explorers were not as successful at locating games as were the trading companies.
According to paragraph 3, how had Fort Vancouver changed by the time David Douglas returned in 1832?
The fort had become the headquarters for the Hudson's Bay Company.
Deer had begun populating the meadows around the fort.
Deer populations near the fort had been destroyed.
Crop yields in the area around the fort had decreased.
Why does the author ask readers to recall the fate of the Columbian white-tailed deer in the discussion of changes in the wilderness landscape?
To provide support for the idea that habitat destruction would lead to population decline
To compare how two species of deer caused biotic changes in the wilderness environment
To provide an example of a species of deer that has successfully adapted to human settlement
To argue that some deer species must be given a protected status
The phrase indefinite period in the passage is closest in meaning to period
whose end has not been determined
that does not begin when expected
that lasts only briefly
whose importance remains unknown
Which of the following statements about deer populations is supported by the information in paragraph 4?
Deer populations reached their highest point during the 1940s and then began to decline.
The activities of settlers contributed in unexpected ways to the growth of some deer populations in later times.
The cleaning of wilderness land for construction caused biotic changes from which the black-tailed deer population has never recovered.
Since the 1940s the winter populations of deer have fluctuated more than the summer populations have.
The word rebound in the passage is closest in meaning to
decline
recovery
exchange
movement
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Arthur Einarsens longtime family with the Pacific Northwest helped him discover areas where deer had an increase in suitable browse.
Arthur Einarsen found that deforested feeding grounds provided deer with more and better food.
Biologist like Einarsen believe it is important to find additional open areas with suitable browse for deer to inhabit.
According to Einarsen, huckleberry and vine maple are examples of vegetation that may someday improve the nutrition of deer in the open areas of the Pacific Northwest.
Which of the following is NOT mentioned in paragraph 5 as a factor that has increased deer populations?
A reduction in the number of predators
Restrictions on hunting
The effects of logging and fire
Laws that protected feeding grounds of deer

The earliest discovered traces of art are beads and carvings, and then paintings, from sites dating back to the Upper Paleolithic period. We might expect that early artistic efforts would be crude, but the cave paintings of Spain and southern France show a marked degree of skill. So do the naturalistic paintings on slabs of stone excavated in southern Africa. Some of those slabs appear to have been painted as much as 28,000 years ago, which suggests that painting in Africa is as old as painting in Europe. But painting may be even older than that. The early Australians may have painted on the walls of rock shelters and cliff faces at least 30,000 years ago, and maybe as much as 60,000 years ago.
The researchers Peter Ucko and Andree Rosenfeld identified three principal locations of paintings in the caves of western Europe: (1) in obviously inhabited rock shelters and cave entrances; (2) in galleries immediately off the inhabited areas of caves; and (3) in the inner reaches of caves, whose difficulty of access has been interpreted by some as a sign that magical-religious activities were performed there.
 The subjects of the paintings are mostly animals. The paintings rest on bare walls, with no backdrops or environmental trappings. Perhaps, like many contemporary peoples, Upper Paleolithic men and women believed that the drawing of a human image could cause death or injury, and if that were indeed their belief, it might explain why human figures are rarely depicted in cave art.
Another explanation for the focus on animals might be that these people sought to improve their luck at hunting.
 This theory is suggested by evidence of chips in the painted figures, perhaps made by spears thrown at the drawings.
 But if improving their hunting luck was the chief motivation for the paintings, it is difficult to explain why only a few show signs of having been speared.
 Perhaps the paintings were inspired by the need to increase the supply of animals. Cave art seems to have reached a peak toward the end of the Upper Paleolithic period, when the herds of game were decreasing.   
The particular symbolic significance of the cave paintings in southwestern France is more explicitly revealed, perhaps, by the results of a study conducted by researchers Patricia Rice and Ann Paterson. The data they present suggest that the animals portrayed in the cave paintings were mostly the ones that the painters preferred for meat and for materials such as hides. For example, wild cattle (bovines) and horses are portrayed more often than we would expect by chance, probably because they were larger and heavier (meatier) than other animals in the environment. In addition, the paintings mostly portray animals that the painters may have feared the most because of their size, speed, natural weapons such as tusks and horns, and the unpredictability of their behavior. That is, mammoths, bovines, and horses are portrayed more often than deer and reindeer. Thus, the paintings are consistent with the idea that the art is related to the importance of hunting in the economy of Upper Paleolithic people. Consistent with this idea, according to the investigators, is the fact that the art of the cultural period that followed the Upper Paleolithic also seems to reflect how people got their food. But in that period, when getting food no longer depended on hunting large game animals (because they were becoming extinct), the art ceased to focus on portrayals of animals.
Upper Paleolithic art was not confined to cave paintings. Many shafts of spears and similar objects were decorated with figures of animals. The anthropologist Alexander Marshack has an interesting interpretation of some of the engravings made during the Upper Paleolithic. He believes that as far back as 30,000 B.C., hunters may have used a system of notation, engraved on bone and stone, to mark phases of the Moon. If this is true, it would mean that Upper Paleolithic people were capable of complex thought and were consciously aware of their environment. In addition to other artworks, figurines representing the human female in exaggerated form have also been found at Upper Paleolithic sites. It has been suggested that these figurines were an ideal type or an expression of a desire for fertility.
 
The word marked in the passage is closest in meaning to
considerable
surprising
limited
adequate
Paragraph 1 supports which of the following statements about painting in Europe?
It is much older than painting in Australia.
It is as much as 28,000 years old.
It is not as old as painting in southern Africa.
It is much more than 30,000 years old.
The word principal in the passage is closest in meaning to
major
likely
well protected
distinct
According to paragraph 2, what makes some researchers think that certain cave paintings were connected with magical-religious activities?
The paintings were located where many people could easily see them, allowing groups of people to participate in the magical-religious activities.
Upper Paleolithic people shared similar beliefs with contemporary peoples who use paintings of animals in their magical-religious rituals.
Evidence of magical-religious activities has been found in galleries immediately off the inhabited areas of caves.
The paintings were found in hard-to-reach places away from the inhabited parts of the cave.
The word trappings in the passage is closest in meaning to
conditions
problems
influences
decorations
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Upper Paleolithic people, like many contemporary peoples, believed that if they drew a human image in their cave art, it would cause death or injury.
Many contemporary people believe that the drawing of a human image can cause death or injury, so they, like Upper Paleolithic people, rarely depicted human figures in their cave art.
If Upper Paleolithic people, like many contemporary peoples, believed that the drawing of a human image could cause death or injury, this belief might explain why human figures are rarely depicted in cave art.
Although many contemporary peoples believe that the drawing of a human image can cause death or injury, researchers cannot explain why Upper Paleolithic people rarely depicted human figures in their cave art.
According to paragraph 3, scholars explained chips in the painted figures of animals by proposing that
Upper Paleolithic artists used marks to record the animals they had seen
the paintings were inspired by the need to increase the supply of animals for hunting
the artists had removed rough spots on the cave walls
Upper Paleolithic people used the paintings to increase their luck at hunting
Why does the author mention that Upper Paleolithic cave art seemed to have reached a peak toward the end of the Upper Paleolithic period, when the herds of game were decreasing?
To argue that Upper Paleolithic art ceased to include animals when herds of game became scarce
To provide support for the idea that the aim of the paintings was to increase the supply of animals for hunting
To emphasize the continued improvement in the quality of cave art throughout the Upper Paleolithic period
To show the direct connection between the decrease in herds of game and the end of the Upper Paleolithic period
According to paragraph 4, scholars believe that wild cattle, horses, and mammoths are the animals most frequently portrayed in cave paintings for all of the following reasons EXCEPT:
These animals were difficult to hunt because their unpredictable behavior.
People preferred these animals for their meat and for their skins.
The painters admired the beauty of these large animals.
People feared these animals because of their size and speed.
According to paragraph 4, which of the following may best represent the attitude of hunters toward deer and reindeer in the Upper Paleolithic period?
Hunters did not fear deer and reindeers as much as they did large game animals such as horses and mammoths.
Hunters were not interested in hunting deer and reindeer because of their size and speed.
Hunters preferred the meat and hides of deer and reindeer to those of other animals.
Hunters avoided deer and reindeer because of their natural weapons, such as horns.
According to paragraph 4, what change is evident in the art of the period following the Upper Paleolithic?
This new art starts to depict small animals rather than large ones.
This new art ceases to reflect the ways in which people obtained their food.
This new art no longer consists mostly of representations of animals.
This new art begins to show the importance of hunting to the economy.
According to paragraph 5, which of the following has been used as evidence to suggest that Upper Paleolithic people were capable of complex thought and conscious awareness of their environment?
They engraved animal figures on the shafts of spears and other objects.
They may have used engraved signs to record the phases of the Moon.
Their figurines represented the human female in exaggerated form.
They may have used figurines to portray an ideal type or to express a desire for fertility.

Petroleum, consisting of crude oil and natural gas, seems to originate from organic matter in marine sediment. Microscopic organisms settle to the seafloor and accumulate in marine mud. The organic matter may partially decompose, using up the dissolved oxygen in the sediment. As soon as the oxygen is gone, decay stops and the remaining organic matter is preserved.
Continued sedimentationthe process of deposits settling on the sea bottomburies the organic matter and subjects it to higher temperatures and pressures, which convert the organic matter to oil and gas.  As muddy sediments are pressed together, the gas and small droplets of oil may be squeezed out of the mud and may move into sandy layers nearby.  Over long periods of time (millions of years), accumulations of gas and oil can collect in the sandy layers.  Both oil and gas are less dense than water, so they generally tend to rise upward through water-saturated rock and sediment.  
Oil pools are valuable underground accumulations of oil, and oil fields are regions underlain by one or more oil pools. When an oil pool or field has been discovered, wells are drilled into the ground. Permanent towers, called derricks, used to be built to handle the long sections of drilling pipe. Now portable drilling machines are set up and are then dismantled and removed. When the well reaches a pool, oil usually rises up the well because of its density difference with water beneath it or because of the pressure of expanding gas trapped above it. Although this rise of oil is almost always carefully controlled today, spouts of oil, or gushers, were common in the past. Gas pressure gradually dies out, and oil is pumped from the well. Water or steam may be pumped down adjacent wells to help push the oil out. At a refinery, the crude oil from underground is separated into natural gas, gasoline, kerosene, and various oils. Petrochemicals such as dyes, fertilizer, and plastic are also manufactured from the petroleum.
As oil becomes increasingly difficult to find, the search for it is extended into more-hostile environments. The development of the oil field on the North Slope of Alaska and the construction of the Alaska pipeline are examples of the great expense and difficulty involved in new oil discoveries. Offshore drilling platforms extend the search for oil to the oceans continental shelvesthose gently sloping submarine regions at the edges of the continents. More than one-quarter of the worlds oil and almost one-fifth of the worlds natural gas come from offshore, even though offshore drilling is six to seven times more expensive than drilling on land. A significant part of this oil and gas comes from under the North Sea between Great Britain and Norway.
Of course, there is far more oil underground than can be recovered. It may be in a pool too small or too far from a potential market to justify the expense of drilling. Some oil lies under regions where drilling is forbidden, such as national parks or other public lands. Even given the best extraction techniques, only about 30 to 40 percent of the oil in a given pool can be brought to the surface. The rest is far too difficult to extract and has to remain underground.
Moreover, getting petroleum out of the ground and from under the sea and to the consumer can create environmental problems anywhere along the line. Pipelines carrying oil can be broken by faults or landslides, causing serious oil spills. Spillage from huge oil-carrying cargo ships, called tankers, involved in collisions or accidental groundings (such as the one off Alaska in 1989) can create oil slicks at sea. Offshore platforms may also lose oil, creating oil slicks that drift ashore and foul the beaches, harming the environment. Sometimes, the ground at an oil field may subside as oil is removed. The Wilmington field near Long Beach, California, has subsided nine meters in 50 years; protective barriers have had to be built to prevent seawater from flooding the area. Finally, the refining and burning of petroleum and its products can cause air pollution. Advancing technology and strict laws, however, are helping control some of these adverse environmental effects.
 
The word accumulate in the passage is closest in meaning to
grow up
build up
spread out
break apart
According to paragraph 1, which of the following is true about petroleum formation?
Microscopic organisms that live in mud produce crude oil and natural gas.
Large amounts of oxygen are needed for petroleum formation to begin.
Petroleum is produced when organic material in sediments combines with decaying marine organisms.
Petroleum formation appears to begin in marine sediments where organic matter is present.
In paragraphs 1 and 2, the authors primary purpose is to
describe how petroleum is formed
explain why petroleum formation is a slow process
provide evidence that a marine environment is necessary for petroleum formation
show that oil commonly occurs in association with gas
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Higher temperatures and pressures promote sedimentation, which is responsible for petroleum formation.
Deposits of sediments on top of organic matter increase the temperature of and pressure on the matter.
Increase pressure and heat from the weight of the sediment turn the organic remains into petroleum.
The remains of microscopic organisms transform into petroleum once they are buried under mud.
The word adjacent in the passage is closest in meaning to
nearby
existing
special
deep
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 3 about gushers?
They make bringing the oil to the surface easier.
They signal the presence of huge oil reserves.
They waste more oil than they collect.
They are unlikely to occur nowadays.
Which of the following strategies for oil exploration is described in paragraph 4?
Drilling under the oceans surface
Limiting drilling to accessible locations
Using highly sophisticated drilling equipment
Constructing technologically advanced drilling platforms
What does the development of the Alaskan oil field mentioned in paragraph 4 demonstrate?
More oil is extracted from the sea than from land.
Drilling for oil requires major financial investments.
The global demand for oil has increased over the years.
The North Slope of Alaska has substantial amounts of oil.
The word sloping in the passage is closest in meaning to
shifting
inclining
forming
rolling
According to paragraph 5, the decision to drill for oil depends on all of the following factors EXCEPT
permission to access the area where oil has been found
the availability of sufficient quantities of oil in a pool
the location of the market in relation to the drilling site
the political situation in the region where drilling would occur
The word foul in the passage is closest in meaning to
reach
flood
pollute
alter
In paragraph 6, the authors primary purpose is to
provide examples of how oil exploration can endanger the environment
describe accidents that have occurred when oil activities were in progress
give an analysis of the effects of oil spills on the environment
explain how technology and legislation help reduce oil spills

Architecture is the art and science of designing structures that organize and enclose space for practical and symbolic purposes. Because architecture grows out of human needs and aspirations, it clearly communicates cultural values. Of all the visual arts, architecture affects our lives most directly for it determines the character of the human environment in major ways.
Architecture is a three-dimensional form. It utilizes space, mass, texture, line, light, and color. To be architecture, a building must achieve a working harmony with a variety of elements. Humans instinctively seek structures that will shelter and enhance their way of life. It is the work of architects to create buildings that are not simply constructions but also offer inspiration and delight. Buildings contribute to human life when they provide shelter, enrich space, complement their site, suit the climate, and are economically feasible. The client who pays for the building and defines its function is an important member of the architectural team. The mediocre design of many contemporary buildings can be traced to both clients and architects.
In order for the structure to achieve the size and strength necessary to meet its purpose, architecture employs methods of support that, because they are based on physical laws, have changed little since people first discovered themeven while building materials have changed dramatically. The worlds architectural structures have also been devised in relation to the objective limitations of materials. Structures can be analyzed in terms of how they deal with downward forces created by gravity. They are designed to withstand the forces of compression (pushing together), tension (pulling apart), bending, or a combination of these in different parts of the structure.
Even development in architecture has been the result of major technological changes. Materials and methods of construction are integral parts of the design of architecture structures. In earlier times it was necessary to design structural systems suitable for the materials that were available, such as wood, stone, brick. Today technology has progressed to the point where it is possible to invent new building materials to suit the type of structure desired. Enormous changes in materials and techniques of construction within the last few generations have made it possible to enclose space with much greater ease and speed and with a minimum of material. Progress in this area can be measured by the difference in weight between buildings built now and those of comparable size built one hundred years ago.
 Modern architectural forms generally have three separate components comparable to elements of the human body: a supporting skeleton or frame, an outer skin enclosing the interior spaces, and equipment, similar to the bodys vital organs and systems.  The equipment includes plumbing, electrical wiring, hot water, and air-conditioning.  Of course in early architecturesuch as igloos and adobe structuresthere was no such equipment, and the skeleton and skin were often one. 
Much of the worlds great architecture has been constructed of stone because of its beauty, permanence, and availability. In the past, whole cities grew from the arduous task of cutting and piling stone upon. Some of the worlds finest stone architecture can be seen in the ruins of the ancient Inca city of Machu Picchu high in the eastern Andes Mountains of Peru. The doorways and windows are made possible by placing over the open spaces thick stone beams that support the weight from above. A structural invention had to be made before the physical limitations of stone could be overcome and new architectural forms could be created. That invention was the arch, a curved structure originally made of separate stone or brick segments. The arch was used by the early cultures of the Mediterranean area chiefly for underground drains, but it was the Romans who first developed and used the arch extensively in aboveground structures. Roman builders perfected the semicircular arch made of separate blocks of stone. As a method of spanning space, the arch can support greater weight than a horizontal beam. It works in compression to divert the weight above it out to the sides, where the weight is borne by the vertical elements on either side of the arch. The arch is among the many important structural breakthroughs that have characterized architecture throughout the centuries.
 
According to paragraph 1, all of the following statements about architecture are true EXCEPT:
Architecture is visual art.
Architecture reflects the cultural values of its creators.
Architecture has both artistic and scientific dimensions.
Architecture has an indirect effect on life.
The word feasible in the passage is closest in meaning to
in existence
without question
achievable
most likely
The word enhance in the passage is closest in meaning to
protect
improve
organize
match
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Unchanging physical laws have limited the size and strength of buildings that can be made with materials discovered long ago.
Building materials have changed in order to increase architectural size and strength, but physical laws of structure have not changed.
When people first started to build, the structural methods used to provide strength and size were inadequate because they were not based on physical laws.
Unlike building materials, the methods of support used in architecture have not changed over time because they are based on physical laws.
The word devised in the passage is closest in meaning to
combined
created
introduced
suggested
The word integral is closest in meaning to
essential
variable
practical
independent
According to paragraph 4, which of the following is true about materials used in the construction of buildings?
Because new building materials are hard to find, construction techniques have changed very little from past generations.
The availability of suitable building materials no longer limits the types of structures that may be built.
The primary building materials that are available today are wood, stone, and brick.
Architects in earlier times did not have enough building materials to enclose large spaces.
In paragraph 4, what does the author imply about modern buildings?
They occupy much less space than buildings constructed one hundred years ago.
They are not very different from the building of a few generations ago.
They weigh less in relation to their size than buildings constructed one hundred years ago.
They take a long time to build as a result of their complex construction methods.
Which of the following correctly characterizes the relationship between the human body and architecture that is described in paragraph 5?
Complex equipment inside buildings is the one element in modern architecture that resembles a component of the human body.
The components in early buildings were similar to three particular elements of the human body.
Modern buildings have components that are as likely to change as the human body is.
In general, modern buildings more closely resemble the human body than earlier buildings do.
The word arduous in the passage is closest in meaning to
difficult
necessary
skilled
shared
Why does the author include a description of how the doorways and windows of Machu Picchu were constructed?
To indicate that the combined skeletons and skins of the stone buildings of Machu Picchu were similar to igloos and adobe structures
To indicate the different kinds of stones that had to be cut to build Machu Picchu
To provide an illustration of the kind of construction that was required before arches were invented
To explain how ancient builders reduced the amount of time necessary to construct buildings from stone
According to paragraph 6, which of the following statements is true of the arch?
The Romans were the first people to use the stone arch.
The invention of the arch allowed new architectural forms to be developed.
The arch worked by distributing the structural load of a building toward the center of the arch.
The Romans followed earlier practices in their use of arches.

The vast grasslands of the High Plains in the central United States were settled by farmers and ranchers in the 1880s. This region has a semiarid climate, and for 50 years after its settlement, it supported a low-intensity agricultural economy of cattle ranching and wheat farming. In the early twentieth century, however, it was discovered that much of the High Plains was underlain by a huge aquifer (a rock layer containing large quantities of groundwater). This aquifer was named the Ogallala aquifer after the Ogallala Sioux Indians, who once inhabited the region
The Ogallala aquifer is a sandstone formation that underlies some 583,000 square kilometers of land extending from northwestern Texas to southern South Dakota. Water from rains and melting snows has been accumulating in the Ogallala for the past 30,000 years. Estimates indicate that the aquifer contains enough water to fill Lake Huron, but unfortunately, under the semiarid climatic conditions that presently exist in the region, rates of addition to the aquifer are minimal, amounting to about half a centimeter a year.
The first wells were drilled into the Ogallala during the drought years of the early 1930s. The ensuing rapid expansion of irrigation agriculture, especially from the 1950s onward, transformed the economy of the region. More than 100,000 wells now tap the Ogallala. Modern irrigation devices, each capable of spraying 4.5 million liters of water a day, have produced a landscape dominated by geometric patterns of circular green islands of crops. Ogallala water has enabled the High Plains region to supply significant amounts of the cotton, sorghum, wheat, and corn grown in the United States. In addition, 40 percent of American grain-fed beef cattle are fattened here.
This unprecedented development of a finite groundwater resource with an almost negligible natural recharge ratethat is, virtually no natural water source to replenish the water supplyhas caused water tables in the region to fall drastically. In the 1930s, wells encountered plentiful water at a depth of about 15 meters; currently, they must be dug to depths of 45 to 60 meters or more. In places, the water table is declining at a rate of a meter a year, necessitating the periodic deepening of wells and the use of ever-more-powerful pumps. It is estimated that at current withdrawal rates, much of the aquifer will run dry within 40 years. The situation is most critical in Texas, where the climate is driest, the greatest amount of water is being pumped, and the aquifer contains the least water. It is projected that the remaining Ogallala water will, by the year 2030, support only 35 to 40 percent of the irrigated acreage in Texas that is supported in 1980.
 
The reaction of farmers to the inevitable depletion of the Ogallala varies. Many have been attempting to conserve water by irrigating less frequently or by switching to crops 
 that require less water.   Others, however, have adopted the philosophy that it is best to use the water while it is still economically profitable to do so and to concentrate on 
 high-value crops such as cotton.   The incentive of the farmers who wish to conserve water is reduced by their knowledge that many of their neighbors are profiting by using great amounts of water,
 and in the process are drawing down the entire regions water supplies.  

In the face of the upcoming water supply crisis, a number of grandiose schemes have been developed to transport vast quantities of water by canal or pipeline from the Mississippi, the Missouri, or the Arkansas rivers.   Unfortunately, the cost of water obtained through any of these schemes would increase pumping costs at least tenfold, making the cost of irrigated agricultural products from the region uncompetitive on the national and international markets.Somewhat more promising have been recent experiments for releasing capillary water (water in the soil) above the water table by injecting compressed air into the ground.Even if this process proves successful, however, it would almost triple water costs. Genetic engineering also may provide a partial solution, as new strains of drought-resistant crops continue to be developed. Whatever the final answer to the water crisis may be, it is evident that within the High Plains, irrigation water will never again be the abundant, inexpensive resource it was during the agricultural boom years of the mid-twentieth century.
 
According to paragraph 1, which of the following statements about the High Plains is true?
Until farmers and ranchers settled there in the 1880s, the High Plains had never been inhabited.
The climate of the High Plains is characterized by higher-than-average temperatures.
The large aquifer that lies underneath the High Plains was discovered by the Ogallala Sioux Indians.
Before the early 1900s there was only a small amount of farming and ranching in the High Plains.
According to paragraph 2, all of the following statements about the Ogallala aquifer are true EXCEPT:
The aquifer stretches from South Dakota to Texas.
The aquifers water comes from underground springs.
Water has been gathering in the aquifer for 30,000 years.
The aquifers water is stored in a layer of sandstone.
Which of the sentences below best expresses the essential information in the highlighted sentence in the passage? Incorrect choices change the meaning in important ways or leave out essential information.
Despite the current impressive size of the Ogallala aquifer, the regions climate keeps the rates of water addition very small.
Although the aquifer has been adding water at the rate of only half a centimeter a year, it will eventually accumulate enough water of fill Lake Huron.
Because of the regions present climatic conditions, water is being added each year to the aquifer.
Even when the region experiences unfortunate climatic conditions, the rates of addition of water continue to increase.
The word ensuing in the passage is closest in meaning to
continuing
surprising
initial
subsequent
In paragraph 3, why does the author provide the information that 40 percent of American cattle are fattened in the High Plains?
To suggest that crop cultivation is not the most important part of the economy of the High Plains
To indicate that not all economic activity in the High Plains is dependent on irrigation
To provide another example of how water from the Ogallala has transformed the economy of the High Plains
To contrast cattle-fattening practices in the High Plains with those used in other region of the United States
The word unprecedented in the passage is closest in meaning to
difficult to control
without any restriction
unlike anything in the past
rapidly expanding
The word virtually in the passage is closest in meaning to
clearly
perhaps
frequently
almost
According to paragraph 4, all of following are consequences of the heavy use of the Ogallala aquifer for irrigation EXCEPT:
The recharge rate of the aquifer is decreasing.
Water tables in the region are becoming increasingly lower.
Wells now have to be dug to much greater depths than before.
Increasingly powerful pumps are needed to draw water from the aquifer.
According to paragraph 4, compared with all other states that use Ogallala water for irrigation, Texas
has the greatest amount of farmland being irrigated with Ogallala water
contains the largest amount of Ogallala water underneath the soil
is expected to face the worst water supply crisis as the Ogallala runs dry
uses the least amount of Ogallala water for its irrigation needs
The word inevitable in the passage is closest in meaning to
unfortunate
predictable
unavoidable
final
Paragraph 5 mentions which of the following as a source of difficulty for some farmers who try to conserve water?
Crops that do not need much water are difficult to grow in the High Plains.
Farmers who grow crops that need a lot of water make higher profits.
Irrigating less frequently often leads to crop failure.
Few farmers are convinced that the aquifer will eventually run dry.
According to paragraph 6, what is the main disadvantage of the proposed plans to transport river water to the High Plains?
The rivers cannot supply sufficient water for the farmers needs.
Increased irrigation costs would make the products too expensive.
The costs of using capillary water for irrigation will increase.
Farmers will be forced to switch to genetically engineered crops.

